Parliament, Wednesday, 2 June 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure will from tomorrow, Thursday 3 June 2021 until Sunday 6 June 2021, hold public hearings on the Expropriation Bill [B23-2020] in the Eastern Cape province. The first session will be held at Mbizana Methodist Church, in Mbizana Town.
	
	The purpose of the Expropriation Bill is to repeal the existing Expropriation Act of 1975 to provide a common framework in line with the Constitution to guide the processes and procedures for the expropriation of property by organs of state, and to provide for certain instances where expropriation with nil compensation may be appropriate in the public interest.
	
	In line with Parliament’s strategic objective of enhancing access to the work of Parliament, legislative making process and improving public participation in general, the committee resolved to visit all the provinces to garner public views on the proposed legislation. The intention of the public hearings is to enrich the Bill and to ensure that it is responsive to the views and needs of individuals and groups on the ground.
	
	Similarly, the committee decided to hold hearings during the week and at weekends to afford as many citizens and stakeholders as possible an opportunity to participate in the hearings. The committee is mindful that the scheduled public hearings will take place during the Adjusted Alert Level 2 lockdown regulations and has taken due regard to ensure adherence to Covid-19 guidelines and regulations.
	
	In line with the announcement made by the President, the committee will adhere to the regulated 100 participants in a venue at any given time. Furthermore, the committee has taken a resolution to postpone hearings in the Northern Cape as the province is experiencing exponential increases on Covid-19 infections.
	
	“We have decided to continue with the Eastern Cape and Western Cape hearings as scheduled, as both provinces are experiencing lower numbers of Covid-19 infections. Following the completion of the Western Cape leg of the hearings the committee will pause its programme until the rate of infections is kept under control in both Northern Cape and Free State,” said Ms Nolitha Ntobongwana, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	Details of the Public Hearings (Day 1)
	Date: Thursday, 03 June 2021
	Venue: Methodist Church, in Mbizana Town
	Time: 10:00
	
	The programme for the hearings can be downloaded using this link: https://tinyurl.com/4drdu9ac
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo