Parliament, Sunday, 6 June 2021 – Questions to President Cyril Ramaphosa, a debate on youth day and policy debates on budget votes are among agenda items featuring in the programme of the National Council of Province (NCOP) this week. The NCOP is the only House which will be continuing with its programme as the National Assembly (NA) is on constituency period.
	
	On Tuesday, the programme will kick-start with a virtual sitting to debate budget votes of the Department of Basic Education and the Department of Higher Education and Training.
	
	The House will continue with budget votes debates on Wednesday, focusing on the Department of Police, Independent Police Investigative Directorate, Civilian Secretariat for the Police Service and the Department of Social Development.
	
	On Thursday, President Cyril Ramaphosa will appear before the hybrid sitting to answer oral questions from Members.
	
	Holding regular question and answer sessions is one way in which Parliament, as provided by section 92(2) of the Constitution, holds the President and the Executive to account. The President’s Questions for Oral Reply are scheduled at least once a quarter during session time within Parliament’s annual programme.
	
	The House will wrap up its weekly-programme with a policy debate on the budget vote of the Department of Home Affairs and a debate on Youth Day under the theme: “Youth Development through access to free higher education and expanded access to skill and development.”
	
	Committees of Parliament will continue with their programmes this week which include, among others, public hearings and committee meetings.
	
	The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure which is currently undertaking the nationwide public hearings on the Expropriation Bill will this week visit the Western Cape Province. The Bill was introduced in Parliament in November 2020 by the Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure. It seeks to provide for the expropriation of property for a public purpose or in the public interest and to provide for certain instances where expropriation with nil compensation may be appropriate in the public interest.
	
	The committee will conduct the Western Cape leg of the hearings from Thursday, 10 June to Sunday, 13 June 2021. The district municipalities to be visited are, West Coast, City of Cape Town, Central Karoo and the Garden Route. The Committee is today concluding the Eastern Cape leg of the hearings in the Nelson Mandela Metropolitan Municipality and has so far successfully conducted the public hearings in Limpopo, Mpumalanga, North West, Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal provinces.
	
	Also, the Portfolio Committee on Social Development is today starting with provincial public hearings on the Children’s Amendment Bill. The hearings are currently underway in Limpopo province, Vhembe District Municipality in Makwarela Community Hall.
	
	The hearings will proceed to Mopani District Municipality- 07 June, Capricorn District Municipality- 08 June and will end in Sekhukhune on Wednesday, 09 June.
	
	The Committee will conduct the Mpumalanga leg of the hearing from 11- 14 June 2021. They will start in the Ehlanzeni District Municipality.
	
	The Children’s Amendment Bill was introduced in Parliament in August 2020 and seeks to amend the Children’s Act, 2005 by among others inserting certain definitions, further providing for children’s rights to privacy and protection of information, further providing for the rights of unmarried fathers, extending the children’s court jurisdiction and to further provide for funding of early childhood development programmes.
	
	About fifteen (15) Committee meetings are scheduled this week and are as follows:
	
	MONDAY, 7 JUNE 2021 
	Ad Hoc Committee on the section 100 Intervention in the North-West Province, Feedback session with the community forum, with (Department of Public works, Human settlements, Police, education and sport development and Premier’s office); Briefing by COGTA on the state of Municipalities in North West;
	Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements, Engagement with Internal and External Stakeholders on the re-tabling of notice of intervention in terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution in Metsimaholo Local Municipality; Consideration and Adoption of Committee Report on the re-tabling of notice of intervention in terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the Constitution in Metsimaholo Local Municipality.
	
	TUESDAY, 8 JUNE 2021 
	Portfolio Committee on Police, Interviews: Critical Infrastructure Council;
	
	Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services, Meeting with the Legal Practice Council to discuss matters of mutual interest;
	
	Select Committee on Finance, Briefing by PBO on key challenges in ensuring economic growth;
	
	Select Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Water and Sanitation and Human Settlements, Briefing by the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs KZN on procedural, constitutional and substantive matters related to invocation of interventions in terms of section 139 (1) (b) of the constitution in nquthu local municipality and mkhanyakude district municipality;
	
	Select Committee on Health and Social Services, Briefing by the Department of Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities on the Annual Performance Plan and Budget Vote; Adoption of DOH Budget Vote report; Adoption of DSD Budget Vote report;
	
	Select Committee on Land Reform, Environment, Mineral Resources and Energy, Negotiating Mandate Meeting on the National Environmental Management Laws Amendment Bill [B14D – 2017] (s76); Consideration and Adoption of Minutes;
	
	Select Committee on Trade and Industry, Economic Development, Small Business Development, Tourism, Employment and Labour, Briefing by Department of Trade, Industry and Competition on Budget Vote, Strategic plan and Annual performance plan; Consideration and adoption of minutes;
	
	WEDNESDAY, 9 JUNE 2021 
	Joint Meeting: Select Committee on Appropriations and Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communications, Briefing by Department of Public Enterprises on proposed transfer of R2.7 billion to SAA subsidiaries and update on expenditure of R7.8 billion transferred to SAA in 2020/21 financial year, including the terms and conditions of the 2018 Special Appropriation Act linked to the approved R10.8 billion to SAA; Consideration of the draft Reports on Appropriation Bill [B4B – 2021] and Special Appropriation Bill [B5 – 2021];
	
	Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour, Deliberations on Employment Equity Amendment Bill;
	
	Portfolio Committee on Police, Interviews: Critical Infrastructure Council;
	
	Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communications, Briefing by Denel regarding the company’s turnaround strategy and its business relationship with Armscor or the National Defence Force;
	
	Select Committee on Transport, Public Service and Administration, Public Works and Infrastructure, Briefing and consideration of the Draft Minimum Service Delivery Standards (MSDS) in terms of section 75(6) of the National Road Traffic Act;
	
	Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sport, Arts and Culture, Committee In-House Business.
	
	THURSDAY, 10 JUNE 2021 
	
	Portfolio Committee on Police, Interviews: Critical Infrastructure Council
	
	Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour, Deliberations on Employment Equity Amendment Bill.
	
	FRIDAY, 11 JUNE 2021
	Ad Hoc Committee on the section 100 Intervention in the North West Province, Briefing by Law enforcement agencies on cases related to s100 intervention in North West. For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly) please click:
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/zlist/20679d84-1f76-4e17-8a47-cbc67f3e28cb.pdf
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Democratic Alliance