Parliament, Wednesday 2 June 2021 – The National Assembly (NA) hybrid plenary sitting will tomorrow resume with the Presidency Budget vote debate that started this afternoon. At the same sitting, the Gender-Based Violence Bills- Criminal and Related Matters Amendment Bill, Criminal Law (Sexual Offences) Amendment Bill and the Domestic Violence Amendment Bill are scheduled for consideration.
	
	The three Bills were introduced in Parliament following a November 2018 Presidential Summit against Gender-Based Violence and Femicide (GBVF). The summit, amongst others, resolved to review existing laws and policies on gender-based violence to be victim-centred and ensure that all other relevant laws respond to GBVF.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA HYBRID PLENARY SITTING:
	Date: Thursday, 03 June 2021
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: NA Chamber and virtual platform
	
	Meanwhile, the NCOP will consider departmental budget policy debates at its virtual plenary sitting at 2pm. The Departmental Budget Vote 11: Public Service and Administration, Budget Vote 7: National School of Government and Budget Vote 31: Employment and Labour will feature.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL PLENARY SITTING:
	Date: Thursday, 03 June 2021
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA hybrid plenary sitting should send their details (full name, media house, ID or passport number) to Manelisi Ntsodo on email: mntsodo@parliament.gov.za by no later than 9am TOMORROW, Tuesday, 3 June.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng