Parliament, Wednesday 9 June 2021 – President Cyril Ramaphosa will appear before the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) in a hybrid plenary sitting tomorrow to answer questions for oral reply.
	
	Holding regular question and answer sessions is one way in which Parliament, as provided by section 92(2) of the Constitution, holds the President and the Executive to account.
	
	Up to six questions about matters of national or international importance may be asked during the session. The six questions scheduled for tomorrow’s sitting cover a range of matters, including: For the full list of questions, please click HERE DETAILS OF THE NCOP HYBRID PLENARY SITTING ARE AS FOLLOWS: Date: Thursday, 10 June 2021
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: NCOP Chamber, Parliament and virtual platform Important to note: Members of the media who wish to physically attend the National Assembly Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: Mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za no later than TOMORROW, Thursday, 10 June at 10am. Media wishing to broadcast from the Parliamentary precinct should also provide details of any essential vehicles (make, registration) and equipment they wish to bring onto the precinct and time of arrival. Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists are urged to forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng