Parliament, Friday, 18 June 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala, has noted with sadness the passing of the former Zambian President Mr Kenneth Kaunda on Thursday. Ms Mahambehlala said the committee is saddened and sends its heartfelt condolences to the people of Zambia and the international community on the passing of this great son of Africa. Ms Mahambehlala said: “KK etched his name into martyrdom by being an example of a leader throughout history. He identified with South Africa’s struggle for freedom and thereby entangled all Zambians into a liberation struggle that no nation could ever do more.” She added that all internationalists ought to dip their banners in honour of this fallen revolutionary. Former President Kaunda was 97 at the time of his passing, the last surviving gallant anti-colonial fighter in his generation, who stood up to white minority rule in Southern African countries, such as South Africa. He led Zambia from 1964, when it attained independence from colonial rule, until 1991. Ms Mahambehlala said no man could do more through eternity than what KK did in just a century of living. “He literally liberated South Africans. We sympathise with Zambians and South Africans, we all should celebrate his life as the man himself would have wanted to be remembered. KK lived a fulfilled life,” Ms Mahambehlala said. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MS TANDI MAHAMBEHLALA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mr Sibongile MaputiParliamentary Communication ServicesCell: 081 052 6060E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape