Parliament, Thursday, 10 June 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Health will tomorrow, Friday, 11 June 2021, visit public health facilities in Gauteng that are rolling out Phase II of the Covid-19 vaccination programme to communities in the province.
	
	The committee resolved to visit all provinces to assess the effectiveness of the rollout of Phase II of the vaccination programme, which includes the vaccination of the elderly and people with comorbidities from 17 May 2021.
	
	“The aim of the visit is to assess the state of preparedness of the facilities to receive, secure and properly store the vaccines, as well as policies for the proper disposal of vaccine vials. It is important that we do this assessment, particularly with the anticipated ramp up of the vaccination programme,” said Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The committee is empowered by Section 55(2) to have oversight over the executive and as a result, it has held numerous engagements with the Department of Health on South Africa’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic. On the 6th of March 2020, following a visit to the Health Port Facility at the OR Tambo International Airport, the committee made a commitment to strengthen its oversight over the department as it implements measures to fight the spread of Covid-19. Tomorrow’s visit forms part of the realisation of a promise that was made by the committee then.
	
	The committee is cognisant that the fight against the spread of Covid-19 will only be strengthened by the effective rollout of vaccines that will eventually ensure herd immunity. Also, the availability of a clear rollout plans up to the point of vaccination, and also taking into consideration different provincial permutations is necessary. These visits will ensure that those plans are in place and Phase II is rolled out effectively.
	
	Also, the committee will in its interaction with the provincial health department seek to ascertain plans in place for the mitigation and management of the healthcare system as the country anticipates the 3rd wave of infection. “Gauteng has as of yesterday recorded 5 111 new cases of Covid-19, and it requires clear plans to mitigate against excessive infections,” Dr Dhlomo emphasised. As part of the visit, the committee will visit the following sites; Charlotte Maxeke Hospital, Albertina Sisulu Clinic, Levai Mbatha Community Health Centre, and Kopanong Hospital.
	
	Details of the visit;
	Date: Friday, 11 June 2021
	Venue: Charlotte Maxeke Hospital
	Time: 08:30
	
	Meeting with MEC 
	Date: Friday, 11 June 2021
	Venue: 45 Commissioner Street, JHB main office, 14th Floor boardroom.
	Time: 16:00
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Democratic Alliance