Parliament, Thursday, 24 June 2021 – The Sub-Committee of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, and the Select Committee on Health and Social Services on the Filling of Vacancies for the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) will continue interviewing shortlisted candidates to fill vacancies on the NYDA Board.
	
	The NYDA Board has seven vacancies, after the term of previous board members expired in May 2020. The filling of board members’ positions is done in accordance with the NYDA Act 54 of 2008.
	
	The sub-committee will tomorrow conclude its interviews of shortlisted candidates for the NYDA Board.
	
	Details for the Interviews are as follows:
	Date: Friday, 25 June 2021
	Time: 9:30am
	Venue: Committee Room E249, Second Floor, National Assembly Building
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on the Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West