Parliament, Tuesday 22 June 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Enterprises today conducted oversight visits to Eskom’s Kusile Power Station and Wilge Flats in Emalahleni, Mpumalanga. The day started with a tour of the massive multibillion rand coal-powered electricity plant before a briefing on progress towards the completion of the project, which began in 2008 and which has cost the government over R140 billion to date. The committee heard that three electricity generation units at Kusile have been completed while the other three are between 85% and 98% towards completion. The committee appreciated the work that has been done at the power plant and hope once fully completed, the plant will help resolve the problems of electricity shortage in the country. The committee, however, was disappointed with the incomplete Wilge Flats project, which was abandoned after costs escalated from just from about R200 million to over R800 million. The flats were intended to house artisans who were working in the construction of Kusile and to be later occupied by Eskom employees once the project was finished, but they were never used because the project was not completed. Eskom management told the committee that a process of disposing the facility was underway. It said possible buyers include the Department of Public Works, and the Department of Human Settlements. The committee has resolved to invite Eskom executive and the Board to provide a detailed report about the issue of Wilge Flats.“We have to appreciate the involvement of the law enforcement agencies. We hope the reports of the Special Investigative Unit (SIU) and the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) will identify the culprits who were involved in any wrong doing and we would like to see a speedy resolution of the problem,” said the committee Chairperson Mr Khaya Magaxa. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ENTERPRISES, MR KHAYA MAGAXA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson of the Committee, please contact: Name: Sakhile Mokoena Cell: 081 705 2130 Email:smokoena@parliament.gov.za Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo