Parliament, Friday, 25 June 2021 – The Select Committee on Education, Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture has noted the progressive stance taken by the government and the Department of Basic Education to roll out vaccines among educators.
	
	The committee Chairperson, Mr Elleck Nchabeleng, said it was important that the vaccines be also administered among general workers who include security guards and old ladies (gogos). “The committee notes with appreciation the progress that is being made in vaccinating educators. It might seem slow but this is such a crucial intervention by our government, and that all teachers should be encouraged to take the jab,” said Mr Nchabeleng.
	
	The Department of Basic Education announced this week that over half a million educators will be vaccinated, and on Wednesday about 50 000 educators, including union leaders were vaccinated. This decision follows government’s strategy to vaccinate health workers and the elderly.
	
	Mr Nchabeleng said the speed with which the jab is administered among educators is important, and that the department should try to achieve its target within a reasonable time.
	
	“The sooner we get back to normal schooling the better, and this intervention will ensure that the impact of the Covid-19 and the new variant is mitigated to some extent. The committee welcomes and notes the intervention in the sector and calls on educators to ensure that over and above the jab, they observe Covid-19 safety protocols like social distancing, masking up and continuous washing of the hands,”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMIITTEE ON EDUCATION, TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NCHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Sibongile Maputi
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape