Parliament, Tuesday, 15 June 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Social Development welcomes the commitment by the MEC for Mpumalanga Province’s Department of Social Development, Ms Lindiwe Ntshalintshali, to conduct an outreach programme on services and support rendered by the department.
	
	The Acting Chairperson of the committee, Ms Kate Bilankulu, has welcomed the issues raised by community members, although some of them were not about the Children’s Amendment Bill. Ms Bilankulu said the issues assisted the committee to know the challenges that people are facing. She told the people that the committee will also follow up and make sure that the commitment is fulfilled.
	
	She said: “Our visit in Mpumalanga and Limpopo shows that there is a need to strengthen communication and the working relationship between the three spheres of government to close the gap which is there now between the social workers and the ECD practitioners.”
	
	Other concerns that the Early Childhood Development (ECD) practitioners raised sharply were the declaration forms, the importance of registering children, and the pending move of ECD functions to the Department of Basic Education.
	
	Ms Bilankulu said the committee noted with appreciation the presence of both Minister Lindiwe Zulu, and the MEC, Ms Ntshalintshali, who not only responded to issues but both remained with the committee for the duration of the public hearings.
	
	“The committee is satisfied with the success of its programme in the past two weeks and believes that the quality input it received will enhance the Children’s Amendment Bill. This is for the welfare and the future of our children,” she added.
	
	She emphasised the importance of the completeness of documents, as alluded to by both the Minister and the MEC, when doing funding applications and registration of ECD centres. This is one aspect of accountability and compliance with legislation.
	
	The public hearings into the Children’s Amendment Bill will now move to the North West, KwaZulu-Natal and the Eastern Cape in the next four weeks.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, MS KATE BILANKULU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Sibongile Maputi
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng