Parliament, Thursday, 10 June 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Social Development will on Friday begin the Mpumalanga leg of the public hearings into the Children’s Amendment Bill (CAB). The committee conducted successful hearings in Limpopo, where it solicited input on the Bill, which aims to improve foster care services for children. The Bill will also address the parental responsibilities of unmarried fathers, child marriages, services to children born to foreign parents and unaccompanied migrant children, among other issues. The committee will hold public hearings on the Bill in Mpumalanga as follows: District: Bushbuck Ridge Local Municipality
	Date: Friday, 11 June 2021
	Venue: Word of Bible Church
	Time: 10h00 District: Nkomazi Local Municipality
	Date: Saturday, 12 June 2021
	Venue: Boschfontein Community Hall
	Time: 10h00 District: Dr JS Moroka Local Municipality
	Date: Sunday, 13 June 2021
	Venue: Kameelrivier Stadium Community Hall
	Time: 10h00 District: Gert Sibande District Municipality
	Date: Monday, 14 June 2021
	Venue: TBC
	Time: 10h00 Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052b6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng