Parliament, Wednesday, 16 June 2021 – Three Security Cluster Ministers will tomorrow, Thursday, 17 June, appear in the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) virtual plenary sitting to provide oral replies to questions from the NCOP permanent delegates.
	
	They are the Minister of Police, the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services and the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans. The plenary sitting will start at 10.00.
	
	Section 92(2) of the Constitution stipulates that, Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of powers and performance of their functions. Questions for Oral Reply sessions are one of the mechanisms Parliament uses in order to hold the Executive to account.
	
	To read the Question Paper in full please click: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/fa6a80db-28fd-46d8-bed0-0f5b252ab3da.pdf
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL PLENARY ARE AS FOLLOWS:
	
	Date: Thursday, 17 June 2021
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the proceedings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via the live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel, Facebook and Twitter pages. Please see links below.
	You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng