Parliament, Friday, 4 June 2021 - The Portfolio Committee on Social Development will on Sunday kick-start its public hearings into the Children’s Amendment Bill (CAB) in Limpopo’s Vhembe District.
	
	The Bill is meant to improve foster care services to children. It is also intended to resolve parental responsibilities of unmarried fathers, child marriages, services to children born to foreign parents and unaccompanied migrant children. Limpopo and Mpumalanga are the first provinces to be visited by the committee for public hearings on the Bill.
	
	The committee will hold public hearings on the Bill in Limpopo as follows:
	
	District: Vhembe
	Date: Sunday, 6 June 2021
	Venue: Makwarela Community Hall (Thulamela)
	Time: 10h00
	
	District: Mopani
	Date: Monday, 7 June 2021
	Venue: Lenyenye Community Hall (Greater Tzaneen)
	Time: 10h00
	
	District: Capricorn
	Date: Tuesday, 8 June 2021
	Venue: Jakes Botes Hall (Polokwane)
	Time: 10h00
	
	District: Sekhukhune
	Date: Wednesday, 9 June 2021
	Venue: Moses Mabotha Civic Hall (Makhuduthamaga)
	Time: 10h00
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West