Parliament, Tuesday, 8 June 2021 – The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Education and Technology, Arts and Culture, Mr Elleck Ntshabeleng, has learnt with sadness the passing of a student at Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) due to Covid-19-related complications.
	
	Mr Ntshabeleng said the loss of life, particularly of a young person, a student, devastates the entire nation as the future of any nation is on its young people. He said the committee sends its condolences to the family, relatives and the TUT community and wishes them strength during this very difficult time.
	
	Mr Ntshabeleng calls on the higher education sector to be extra cautious as the rate of infections is rising on a daily basis. “We are appealing, as the committee, to the leaders of institutions of higher learning to ensure that safety measures are in place and are onservatively adhered to,” emphasised Mr Ntshabeleng.
	
	The committee notes and welcomes the suspension of contact classes by the university following the passing on of the student. “We wish that this was the last death of a student because of Covid-19-related illness,” said Mr Nchabeleng.
	
	The Department of Health’s latest report on new cases and Covid-19-related deaths is alarming and the situation calls for strict adherence to health protocols on Covid-19. Mr Ntshabeleng said the recovery rate of 93% is encouraging.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY, ARTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NTSHABELENG.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr) Parliamentary Communication ServicesTel: 021 403 8738Cell: 081 503 1840E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za  A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West