Parliament, Sunday, 6 June 2021 – The communities of Limpopo’s Vhembe District are calling for the Children’s Amendment Bill to improve the child support services and the grants children get from the government. The call was made by children’s parents during the public hearings on Children’s Amendment Bill that were kick-started by the Portfolio Committee on Social Development today in the Vhembe District’s Thulamela Local Municipality. The parents told the committee that it was important for the Bill to guarantee equal parenting rights to both parents without giving more parenting rights to mothers. The committee was informed that in the border towns, cases of children with foreign parents were not uncommon. The communities pleaded that the matter of documentation for such children should be resolved speedily. Another issue that was raised by parents was birth certificates which are important for grant applications and Early Childhood Development (ECD) registration. The Acting Chairperson of the committee, Ms Kate Bilankulu, said the committee came to listen from the people and afford them an opportunity to express their views on the Bill so that they can own the legislation that is going to be delivered in the end. “We want to get a better understanding of the views of the people on this Bill and ensure that they are part of making a law that they can own. This legislation seeks to improve the welfare of children,” said Ms Bilankulu. Ms Bilankulu told the people who raised concerns that some of those concerns will not be attended to by the committee, but it will forward them to the relevant government departments. The Provincial Department of Social Development told the committee that it was always willing to resolve challenges when they are reported to it. Limpopo’s programme continues as follows:. District: Mopani
	Date: Monday, 7 June 2021
	Venue: Lenyenye Community Hall (Greater Tzaneen)
	Time: 10h00 District: Capricorn
	Date: Tuesday, 8 June 2021
	Venue: Jakes Botes Hall (Polokwane)
	Time: 10h00 District: Sekhukhune
	Date: Wednesday, 9 June 2021
	Venue: Moses Mabotha Civic Hall (Makhuduthamaga)
	Time: 10h00 ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY SERVICES ON BEHALAF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, MS KATE BILANKULU. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Free State