Parliament, Friday, 11 June 2021 – The Select Committee on Education, Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture has noted with appreciation the rollout of the laptops to deserving National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) students. The Chairperson, Mr Elleck Nchabeleng, said the intervention was a welcome relief and will assist greatly those students who cannot afford laptops. “The committee really welcomes this initiative between NSFAS and the Department of Higher Education. The outbreak of Covid-19 simply meant that things will never be the same again. Our young people need to adjust to new ways of learning and shift to online learning. “What makes this intervention all the more important is that it is over and above all kinds of allowances to make sure that poor students do not feel left out.” Mr Nchabeleng said the committee therefore calls for adequate support that includes free software and applications installations, and repairs as and when required. Minister Blade Nzimande and NSFAS handed over government-funded laptops to students at the South Cape TVET college. The programme will also see students at universities benefit. Mr Nchabeleng said a strengthened and stricter monitoring of the procurement of the laptops was required so that value matches functionality and quality of the machines. “This ought not to be a scheme where vultures will seek to steal government money,” added Mr Nchabeleng. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NCHABELENG. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr) 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za Anybody over the age of 18 can participate indirectly in Parliament simply by voting in the elections. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal