Parliament, Monday, 07 June 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has unanimously agreed to a shortlist of candidates that may be interviewed for possible appointment to the Critical Infrastructure Council. As per Section 4 (7) (c) of the Critical Infrastructure Act, the candidates were taken through a vetting process.
	
	The committee will now proceed to interview the shortlisted 17 candidates. The process of shortlisting was transparent, fair, consultative and consensus-seeking.
	
	As part of the process, the committee took regard of relevant qualifications and skills, expertise and experience necessary to enhance the council to deliver on its mandate. The fields of experience considered included, critical infrastructure protection, risk management, engineering, disaster management and cybersecurity. Also, the committee considered gender and racial representativity to ensure that the council reflects the South African demographics.
	
	The Critical Infrastructure Council is established as per Section 04 of the Critical Infrastructure Protection Act which was assented to by the President on 28 November 2019. The process the committee is undertaking is provided for in Section 04 (7) of the Act. The CIP Act repeals and replaces the National Key Points Act, 1980.
	
	The responsibilities of the Critical Infrastructure Council will include considering and making recommendations in respect of applications to be designated as critical infrastructure, approving various guidelines, and reporting to the Minister of Police in respect of all matters relating to the CIP Act. The Minister of Police in turn must then on a bi-annual basis, table a report in Parliament on the activities of the Critical Infrastructure Council.
	
	The committee is content with the calibre of candidates it received and is hopeful that the recommended candidates will be fit and proper individuals to deliver on their mandate.
	
	As per Section 4 (7) (c), the committee is required to refer the list of 20 shortlisted persons to the State Security Agency for consideration and issuing of a top secret security clearance. The committee, decided to submit 21 candidates to the State Security Agency to enable the committee to proceed with the legislated interviews in the case that some names fail to attain the necessary security clearance.
	The interview process will take place over a three-day period and will be done physically in Parliament.
	
	The programme for the interviews can be downloaded here; https://tinyurl.com/abbmw75h
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. African National Congress