Parliament, Monday, 21 June 2021 – The Sub-Committee of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, and the Select Committee on Health and Social Services on the Filling of Vacancies for the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA) will tomorrow start the week-long process of interviewing shortlisted candidates to fill vacancies on the NYDA Board.
	
	The NYDA Board has seven vacancies, after the term of previous board members expired in May 2020.
	
	The filling of board members’ positions is done in accordance with the NYDA Act 54 of 2008.
	
	The sub-committee shortlisted 40 candidates that will be interviewed.
	
	Details for the Interviews
	Date: 22 June 2021
	Time: 10:00 – 19:00pm
	Venue: Good Hope Chamber, Ground Floor, Good Hope Building
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga