Parliament, Saturday, 20 March 2021 - The Portfolio Committee on International Relations and Cooperation has noted the fact that the Minister of the Department of International Relations and Cooperation has begun to implement the committee’s oversight report which contains recommendations on the New York project. Furthermore, the committee applauds the Minister for her positive response in this regard. The Minister has informed the Chairperson of the committee, Ms Tandi Mahambehlala, of her decision to put the Chief Financial Officer, Mr Caiphus Ramashau, on precautionary suspension as the first step in implementing the committee’s oversight report on the New York project. It is in this spirit that the committee has stood steadfast that when implementing its report, it must be taken into confidence and be informed. Ms Mahambehlala said: “‘This is a step in the right direction as we have repeatedly said. The committee has no business in who the Minister should or should not suspend.” Ms Mahambehlala added: “It is only when an action is associated with the implementation of the committee’s recommendations in its oversight report, that it strongly emphasised the importance of being informed as opposed to hearing about such through the media.” Indeed, the committee worked very hard through its proactive oversight to verify the findings of the Auditor-General on the officials involved in the discrepancies around the New York project. They found no vacant land, but only a dilapidated red brick building. “It has been a collective effort followed by a unanimous adoption of the committee’s report by Parliament, that the department is accordingly responding,” said Ms Mahambehlala. It is the committee’s considered view that, while it is the prerogative of the department and the ministry to conduct their own businesses, however, Parliament’s oversight role should always be taken into consideration in accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AND COOPERATION, MS TANDI MAHAMBEHLALA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. Economic Freedom Fighters