Parliament, Tuesday 30 March 2021 – Parliament, in partnership with the South African National Aids Council and the Department of Social Development, will be launching the 2020 to 2022 Men’s Parliament programme of action on Thursday, 1 April.
	
	The programme of action, to be held under the theme: “Takuwani Riime - Institutionalising a Responsive Men’s Movement” follows the two biennial national Men’s Parliaments which were held in 2018 and 2020 under the banner of the Takuwani Riime Men’s Movement - a civil society movement led by men which, amongst others, seeks to address the role of men in combating the spread of HIV & GBV.
	
	The Men’s Parliaments are aimed at assisting to develop and coordinate the Men Championing Change programme to reach the targeted population of men’s and boys’ formations across the country which include building strategic partnerships and alliance with different stakeholders and development agencies on issues such as GBV, social cohesion, crime, substance abuse and men’s health.
	
	Details of the launch are as follows:
	
	Date: Thursday 1 April 2021
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: 75 Commissioner Street, 1st Floor Auditorium, Perm Building, Johannesburg and virtual platform
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal