Parliament, Friday, 12 March 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry, responsible for making a recommendation to the Minister of Trade, Industry and Competition regarding the position of the Chairperson of the Board of the National Lotteries Commission, today resolved to forward the names of three candidates for consideration.
	
	Committee Chairperson Mr Duma Nkosi said the names of Mr T Tselane, Dr N Pityana and Dr M Madzivhandila will be sent to the National Assembly for consideration, before being sent to the Minister as a recommendation for his consideration.
	
	The Speaker of the National Assembly received a letter and CVs from the Minister of Trade and Industry nominating candidates for the position and requesting the relevant committee to make a recommendation. The Speaker then referred the list of 42 nominated candidates to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry. One candidate withdrew their nomination and the committee therefore considered 41 names in its shortlisting process. The committee then shortlisted eight candidates: Rev F Chikane, Ms B Ferguson, Mr T Dlamini, Dr M Madzivhandila, Dr N Pityana, Mr A Trikamjee, Mr T Tselane and Mr G Xaba. They were interviewed on 9 March 2021.
	
	Explaining the process following the conclusion of the interviews, Mr Nkosi said the committee had agreed to four names for committee members to take back to their political parties for consideration, in order to arrive at a list of three names for recommendation. The four were Mr T Tselane, Dr N Pityana, Dr M Madzivhandila and Mr T Dlamini. During today’s consideration of the names, Mr Tselane had the support of all five political parties represented on the committee and Dr Pityana had the support of four. The committee voted on the third candidate, as each of the other candidates initially received the support of two parties. During voting Dr Madzivhandila received more votes than Mr Dlamini and was therefore included as the third candidate.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY, MR DUMA NKOSI. 
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng