Parliament, Tuesday 2 March 2021 – Six Peace and Security Cluster Ministers are scheduled to answer oral questions at the National Assembly (NA) plenary sitting tomorrow afternoon.
	
	The six are the Minister of Defence and Military Veterans, the Minister of Home Affairs, the Minister of International Relations and Co-operation, the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services, the Minister of Police and the Minister of State Security
	
	The sitting will be a hybrid one – with a limited number of NA Members being physically present in the NA Chamber (in line with the social distancing guidelines) and other Members joining proceedings through a virtual platform.
	
	Parliament uses a range of instruments to scrutinise and oversee executive action. Section 92(2) of the Constitution also stipulates that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of their powers and performance of their functions.
	
	For the full list of questions, please click:
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/746ece74-e54e-4b5c-b21d-659f0f91219c.pdf
	
	Details of the hybrid sitting are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday 3 March
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber at Parliament and virtual platform
	
	Note to media
	Media wishing to be physically present in the NA Chamber for the sitting must send their details (full name, name of media house, ID/ passport number) to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za
	
	Media who wish to observe the hybrid sitting on a virtual platform must send their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists must forward their requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the proceedings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via the live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel, Facebook and Twitter pages. Please see links below.
	
	You may subscribe to the Parliament’s YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICAEnquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West