DATE: 12 MARCH 2021 VENUE: VIRTUAL
	
	Programme Director and Chairperson of the Multi-Party Women’s Caucus, Honourable Nkhensani Bilankulu
	Deputy Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces, Honourable Sylvia Lucas
	Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, Honourable Lechesa Tsenoli
	Honourable Members of Parliament
	Distinguished guests
	Ladies and gentlemen
	
	Programme Director, let me start by noting the sad news of the passing of the King of the Zulu nation, King Goodwill Zwelithini kaBhekuzulu, iSilo samaBandla. I wish to express our sincere condolences to the family and the people.
	
	Today’s lecture seeks to celebrate the life and legacy of the late struggle stalwart Charlotte Maxeke. I therefore highly appreciate the opportunity to make an input in this important engagement held under the theme “Choose to Challenge”, which is derived from the 2021 International Women’s Day theme.
	
	In celebrating a giant like Charlotte Maxeke, the big question to ask is: What better way to accelerate gender equality and women’s participation across all sectors of society 27 years into our democracy?
	
	In trying to answer this critical question, one is inundated with many living examples of women in top leadership positions from across the length and breadth of the country and the continent. It seems proper that the first thing to do is to celebrate and support them so that they can multiply.
	
	In January this year, Professor Puleng LenkaBula assumed the position of Principal and Vice-Chancellor of the University of South Africa. This was an unprecedented move. As a woman, she dismantled entrenched barriers to become the first woman to head one of the world’s mega universities and the only one of its kind in Africa. It has taken 148 years for a woman to head the University of South Africa.
	
	Professor LenkaBula is thus one of the many women we must celebrate and support, so that many women out there, especially black women, can also rise. There are quite many examples of these remarkable achievements by women in our country, including that of Ms Tsakani Maluleke, the first woman to become South Africa’s Auditor General after 109 years of the existence of this office. The South African Local Government Association (SALGA), which is a critical sphere in terms of the country’s socio-economic transformation, is led by a woman, Ms Thembi Nkadimeng.
	
	This month, Dr Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, who was born in Nigeria, became the first woman and first African to serve as the Director-General of the World Trade Organisation. As many of you know, the World Trade Organisation (WTO) is the only global international organisation dealing with the rules of trade between nations. At its heart are the WTO agreements, negotiated and signed by the bulk of the world’s trading nations and ratified in their parliaments. The significance of this appointment is not lost – trade, power jostling and concessions have for a long time featured the face of men.
	
	Programme Director, Dr Okonjo-Iweala is Africa’s lodestar - an inspiration to many women across the globe, young and old. Her achievement is without doubt worth celebrating. She deserves the support of all of us, men and women of the world, so that we can have more women of her talent in the higher echelons of society. Surely, this will stir the enthusiasm of millions.
	
	What makes these appointments, and many others, worth celebrating is that they broke with tradition. So many of our national and global institutions have, without question, nurtured patriarchal beliefs and tendencies that continue to suppress and oppress women.
	
	It is because of this reality that I cannot think of any better way to contribute to the acceleration of the progress of women than to support and celebrate the strides that they are making, including breaking centuries-old barriers.
	
	At the start of the past century, women’s role was primarily a domestic one; it included child rearing and seeing to the well-being, feeding and care of the family. Women were not expected to concern themselves with matters outside the home – that was more properly the domain of men.
	
	Thus for a long time, women have been at the bottom of the social hierarchy, with poor access to land, credit, health and education.
	
	In 1994, the Reconstruction and Development Programme directed our country to focus on ensuring a full and equal role for women in every aspect of our economy and society. Further, it stated that we must unlock boundless energies and creativity suppressed by racism and discrimination.
	
	Since then, South Africa has made great strides in developing the legislative framework and implementing programmes to facilitate women’s full participation in all social, economic and political spheres. At the centre of these efforts is the Constitution which provides for equality for all persons.
	
	Against this backdrop, we should therefore support and celebrate women by, amongst other things, promoting their representation in key levers of power. In addition, we must also capacitate leaders of society in general to deal with matters of gender abuse and gender-based violence.
	
	Besides its injurious nature, gender-based violence lowers the dignity of women in society and sullies the integrity of our great nation. This occurs in spite of the fact that our Constitution guarantees that everyone has inherent dignity and the right to have their dignity respected and protected.
	
	Programme Director, supporting and celebrating women requires our commitment to find effective and sustainable structural mechanisms to ensure the realisation of women’s potential in leadership roles. The government’s commitment to the implementation of the policy that 40% of public procurement should go to women-owned businesses is one such mechanism. This approach is necessary for the achievement of total emancipation of women.
	
	It is common knowledge that significant progress has been made in the public sector in regard to ensuring women representation in key levers of power. However, more improvements are needed across society. This is particularly so in the private sector.
	
	In 2018 we celebrated the appointment of Ms Basani Maluleke to the position of Chief Executive Officer of the African Bank. She became the first black woman to lead a South African bank. However, her resignation earlier this year has raised eyebrows. It left unanswered questions in relation to the ability of corporate South Africa to support black women leadership.
	
	What is concerning in relation to this development is the widely held view that her resignation had nothing to do with her performance. This is what happens when we fail to support and celebrate women achievement: Instead of further burdening women for daring to lead, we must support and celebrate their success. This would serve as an encouragement to many aspirant women leaders and practitioners.
	
	Supporting and celebrating the success of women leadership is the antithesis of the PHD (or pull her down) syndrome. It requires of us to remove barriers so that others may rise. In return we expect those who manage to move up the ladder to, as the saying goes, lift as they rise.
	
	Programme Director, it is my submission that one of the ways to accelerate gender equality and women’s participation across all sectors of society is to support and celebrate women achievement so that many more women could be inspired. So that many more could prevail. So that as a nation we could address the challenges that women continue to face.
	
	The democratic government has done much to promote gender equality through its progressive policies and programmes. Many women have ascended to the key levers of power, especially in the public sector. However, a lot still needs to be done. Gender-based violence and the failure to meaningfully support black women leadership, especially in the private sector, remain some of our modern-day challenges, chief among them being joblessness, inequality and poverty.
	
	Programme Director, but was it not Charlotte Maxeke who studied and achieved a Bachelor of Science degree? Would she not be wondering about visiting and exploring the thousands of planets and galaxies seeking to understand, like many human beings, the nature of the universe and its implications? Surely, women, here too, can distinguish themselves as we strive to take humanity to a higher and different level.
	
	As we celebrate Charlotte Maxeke, who would have marvelled at the achievements that women are making in the 21st century, let us recommit ourselves to inspire more women to follow in her footsteps and to excel.
	
	Within our institution, let’s welcome and support the newly established Parliamentary Women and Gender Rights Forum which seeks, amongst other things, to promote a rights-based approach in all areas of the workplace, including transformation, economic empowerment, leadership, a safe working environment and sustainability.
	
	As per the old saying, charity begins at home. There is so much more to be done.
	
	I thank you ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA  A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal