Parliament, Sunday, 14 March 2021 – The Ad Hoc Committee on section 100 Intervention in the North West Province will visit the province this week to assess progress and impact of the intervention. Central to the visit is to assess if the intervention has had a direct impact on service delivery and the lives of the people of the province.
	
	According to Section 100 of the Constitution, national government interventions in a provincial administration may take place when a province cannot or does not fulfil an executive obligation in terms of the Constitution or legislation.
	
	The visit is constitutionally mandated as Section 100 (2) (c) prescribes that if the national executive intervenes in a province, the Council must, “while the intervention continues, review the intervention regularly and may make any appropriate recommendations to the national executive”. The visit follows extensive engagements that the committee had with the Inter-Ministerial Task Team (IMTT), National Treasury, the Office of the Auditor-General and law enforcement agencies.
	
	Following the engagement with the IMTT, the committee acknowledged that there were compelling reasons to extend Section 100 intervention in the North West Province. Some of the issues raised that still needed attention was the high vacancy rate in senior management, especially heads of departments within the province. Also, the slow pace of consequence management was raised as a serious issue that had the potential of undermining confidence the people of the province had in the intervention.
	
	Another matter of concern was the reported hostility in the intervention team which impacted its ability to implement intervention strategies to turn things around in the province. The committee will use this visit to assess if those issues of concern have improved and if the intervention is making an impact on the lives of the people of the North West Province.
	
	The committee has also raised concerns about the pace of investigations that may lead to prosecution of wrongdoers. “While we remain cognisant that investigation must be meticulous and sometimes lengthy in efforts to ensure watertight legal processes, we remain concerned that some cases have dragged since 2018 with no set timeframe for conclusion of the investigation,” said Mr China Dodovu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	As part of the visit, the committee will interact with the North West Provincial Executive, the IMTT, the National Prosecuting Authority, administrators, labour organisations, Department of Health, and the Department of Basic Education. The committee will also visit various sites, including Mahikeng hospitals, schools and Madibogo-Pan Bridge and road to assess service delivery.
	
	Details of the visit are as follows:
	Date: Monday, 15 March 2021
	Time: 09:30
	Venue: Mahikeng, North West
	
	The programme for the oversight visit can be accessed here:
	Group 1: https://tinyurl.com/yh9h9f2d
	Group 2: https://tinyurl.com/48cfy4jx
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON SECTION 100 INTERVENTION IN THE NORTH WEST PROVINCE, MR CHINA DODOVU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal