Parliament, Friday, 12 March 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) held a follow-up engagement yesterday with Dr Ruth Segomotsi Mompati District Municipality and Kagisano-Molopo Local Municipality on the state of the municipalities.
	
	In recapping the previous meeting of 2 March 2021 with the municipalities, the Chairperson of the committee, Ms Faith Muthambi, said the committee resolved that the Provincial Department of Cooperative Governance, Human Settlements and Traditional Affairs (COGHSTA) must interact with the district on the Vhenda Building Society (VBS) matter, as there were contradicting reports, and make a report available to the committee by Friday, 5 March 2021.
	
	The COGHSTA was also required to furnish the committee with a progress report on the processing of the Annual Financial Statements and the Annual Report of Naledi Local Municipality. The district municipality was requested to respond to all questions raised in writing. Furthermore, the committee requested a detailed response to the questions raised with Kagisano-Molopo Local Municipality following the difficulties experienced with the answers received from the Mayor. The committee had received all reports and explanations as requested.
	
	The committee received a detailed presentation from Mamusa Local Municipality covering a breakdown of the unauthorised, irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure, as well as the letter from the Mayor authorising the appointment of the Municipal Manager, Mr Ransho Gincane. The committee is in receipt of a copy of the settlement agreement related to the three employees previously dismissed for burning down municipal property.
	
	The committee further requested the Chief Financial Officer of Lekwa Teemane Local Municipality to submit a report on the dispute between the municipality and the district municipality around the R294 million summons from the Department of Water and Sanitation for the provision of bulk water, as well as a report on the landfill sites, by Thursday, 4 March 2021, but the report was not received.
	
	The committee heard from the MEC for COGHSTA, Mr Mmoloki Cwaile, that the province had held a meeting with Kagisano-Molopo Local Municipality wherein the rightful councillor for the Forum for Service Delivery, Mr Modirwa Tong, will be sworn in next Monday. The province will be taking action against the Speaker, Ms Stokie Modise of the municipality with costs if she failed to swear in Mr Tong.
	
	The Speaker had informed the committee that she did not have legal capacity in her office to assist her and relied on the office manager. The committee was not happy with the responses form the Speaker on her failure to swear in the rightful councillor who was on the Independent Electoral List, even though she received a court order.
	
	The Chairperson of the Committee, Ms Faith Muthambi said that, “there is lawlessness and a complete disregard of laws and regulations. There is no municipality there, no administrative intervention can solve their challenges”. The mayor and speaker were described as “poor old ladies” who were being dominated by the municipal manager. It was alleged that in the whole council no one had matric, so the municipal manager is the alpha and omega. The committee was concerned that throughout the entire meeting from 19:00 until 00:15 the speaker and mayor were consistently telling lies.
	
	The committee expressed its dissatisfaction with the responses it received from both the Mayor and the Speaker of Kagisano-Molopo Local Municipality and therefore resolved to first check the possibility of invoking Chapter 15 of the Powers and Priviledges Act. The committee will undertake the second oversight visit to Kagisano – Molopo Local Municipality.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape