Parliament, Wednesday, 10 March 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (GoGTA) had an engagement yesterday virtually with the Free State Province’s Lejweleputswa District Municipality on its state and the state of all local municipalities under its jurisdiction. The local municipalities under it are: Masilonyana, Mathjabeng, Nala, Tswelopele and Tokologo.
	
	The committee also had a briefing from the Office of the Auditor-General South Africa, the South African Local Government Association (Salga), provincial and national departments of Cooperative Government and Traditional Affairs and the National Treasury.
	
	The committee told the district municipality and the municipalities under its jurisdiction that in 2018/19, the Free State had the highest number of municipalities that failed to submit financial statements on time and Masilonyana Local Municipality is one of the worst municipalities. The committee said it is now 18 months past the deadline for the submission of the 2018/19 financial statements for auditing, and yet the municipality’s submission is still outstanding and the municipality has not yet accounted for the manner in which it used the taxpayers’ money in 2018/19.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Faith Muthambi, said: “This is a dereliction of duty and shows gross disregard for the prescripts of the Municipal Financial Management Act (MFMA). There is no demonstrable evidence that the municipality received effective financial management support from the district.”
	
	The committee also highlighted audit findings in respect of the inappropriate valuation rolls of Matjhabeng and Masilonyana as another cause for concern. It said these are likely to generate disputes that may lead to the withholding of payments by ratepayers. “A management and leadership that entertains such potential loss of revenue does not have the best interests of the municipality at heart. With a colossal debt of over R7 billion owed to Eskom and Sedibeng Water, Matjhabeng should especially be striving to use every opportunity to maximise revenue collection,” emphasised Ms Muthambi.
	
	The committee said Lejweleputswa District Municipality remains a beacon of hope in the Free State Province given its relatively favourable audit outcomes over the last three financial years; an audit committee and an internal audit that have provided some level of assurance; as well as irregular expenditure that was reduced significantly from R14.2 million in the 2017/18 financial year to R583 280 in the 2018/19 financial year.
	
	The committee engaged each of the municipalities which were represented by their mayors, council speakers, municipal managers and senior technical managers to account to the committee on a wide range of challenges that included crumbling infrastructure, inability to raise revenue, failure to submit credible and quality financial documents to SARS (South African Revenue Service) for auditing purposes and failure to deliver basic survices to the people above all.
	
	The committee told the mayors and their municipal mangers that so long as there is no consequence management for disloyalty and disrespect for the principles of clean and effective governance, the trend of mismanagement, chaos, corruption and poor service delivery that has deepened in other municipalities for the past four years and that renders the municipalities shadows of themselves, will deepen forever. It called for a turnaround strategy, arguing that the municipalities must be driven by their constitutional mandate to render services to the people.
	
	Ms Muthambi made reference to the tendencies that render the administration of the municipality ineffective, such as the fight between the Municipal Manager and Technical Director at Tokologo Local Municipality that led to zero spending of the Municipal Infrastructure Grant at the end of December 2020. She said: “It is the communities that suffer in the end.” She added that the municipality obtained disclaimers for three financial years, 2016/17, 2017/18 and 2018/19.
	
	The committee told the national and provincial departments that they are failing to play the role they are supposed to play of rendering adequate and effective support to the local municipalities. Furthermore, it said poor performance by these municipalities confirms that failure beyond doubt. It called upon them to rise to the occasion by playing their part and it called upon the district municipality which demonstrates enough capacity to assist these ailing municipalities, to use the new District Development Model mechanism to turn things around.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON COOPERATIVE GOVERNANCE AND TRADITIONAL AFFAIRS, MS FAITH MUTHAMBI.
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sgovender@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape