Parliament, Friday, 12 March 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs will today in the afternoon continue with its engagement with Amathole District Municipality to discuss its state and the state of all local municipalities under its jurisdiction. The municipalities are: Raymond Mahlaba, Amathlati, Great Kei, Mnquma and Mbashe local municipalities.
	
	The committee will also receive a briefing from the Office of the Auditor-General, the South African Local Government Association, Provincial Departments of Cooperative Governance, Traditional Affairs and Human Settlements, and Treasury.
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows: 
	Date: 12 March 2021
	Time:  15:00 – 20:00
	Venue: Virtual meeting platform
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender (Ms) 
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal