Parliament, Wednesday, 10 March 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Health was briefed by the National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS) on in annual report and financial statement for 2019/20.
	
	Briefing the committee, Dr Kamarni Chetty, CEO of the National Health Laboratory Services (NHLS) said its revenue and income grew from R8.5 billion to R9.3 billion, with provinces accounting for 89% of total revenue generated and surplus amounting to R1.082 billion. The NHLS reported a cash balance of R4.1 billion at the end of the financial year, which greatly assisted with the NHLS’s response to Covid-19 in the months after the financial year end. He said the NHLS is ready to deal with the third wave of the pandemic.
	
	Dr Chetty informed the committee that the NHLS’s financial situation improved significantly in the 2019/20 financial year. Through extensive negotiations, provinces have substantially reduced their historic debt and have cleared previous years’ debt.
	
	The committee welcomed the comprehensive report and the unqualified audit opinion that the NHLS achieved over the past two financial years. The committee commended the NHLS for reducing monies owed by provinces. However, NHLS must continue to improve and also collect the R4 billion still outstanding.
	
	Committee Chairperson Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo said: “Leadership provided by the former and current Minister of Health was mentioned as one of the factors that contributed the improvement of the financial situation of NHLS.”
	
	The committee noted with concern that the NHLS might incur millions of rands in litigation costs and that liquidators’ judgements will have an impact on liquidity. Dr Chetty reassured members of the committee on this score, saying this would not be problem.
	
	Regarding the NHLS response to Covid-19, Board Chairperson of NHLS Prof Eric Buch said the report presented is for the 2019/20 financial year. Covid-19 work started in the financial year 2020/21. Prof Buch requested a separate meeting during which the NHLS can provide a comprehensive report-back on its work during the pandemic. He informed the committee that NHLS made large investments to ensure Covid-19 capabilities and that laboratories functioned throughout the pandemic to meet needs.
	
	The committee asked questions about the transfer of the South African Police Service’s forensic laboratory to the NHLS, wondering if the NHLS will be able to cope with the forensic backlog. Dr Chetty clarified that the NHLS will be taking over the forensic chemistry laboratory services, according to proclamation, currently located within the National Department of Health. This is part of the NHLS Act, as promulgated in 2020. Four laboratories will deal with blood alcohol levels and toxicology for the criminal justice system, and as well as food chemistry.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng