Parliament, Friday, 12 March 2021 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution, which will allow for the expropriation of land without compensation, today agreed to set aside several days for oral presentations from organisations which made the request in their written submissions.
	
	Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga, said the committee would not be going on a “fishing expedition” to seek out organisations to be heard on this matter but rather only invite those organisations that indicated in their written submissions the need to elaborate further during oral presentations.
	
	According to the latest committee programme, next week three government departments – which also requested to be heard on the matter – will be given an opportunity to voice their stance on the matter. Several organisations have made similar requests and will be accommodated the following week. These include AfriForum, the Banking Association of South Africa, the Congress of South African Trade Unions (better known as Cosatu), Black First Land First, the Congress of Traditional Leaders of South Africa and AgriSA.
	
	Regarding the request for an extension to the deadline for the committee to finalise its work, the committee resolved that now that it has a better idea of the time required for oral presentations due to its updated programme, it will request Parliament to extend its lifespan until 21 May 2021 in order to give it sufficient time to thoroughly conduct all its work. The committee was expected to adopt the Bill on the constitutional amendments by 19 March 2021.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Committees have the power to summons any person to appear before them to give evidence or produce documents. They may ask any person or institution to report to them and may receive petitions, representations or submissions from the public. They play a crucial role in the law-making process. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo