Parliament, Thursday, 11 March 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, has condemned the unwarranted excessive violence by the police that led to the death of Mr Mthokozisi Ntumba in Johannesburg.
	
	“While we do not want to pre-empt the investigation by the Independent Police Investigative Directorate, the killing of the innocent bystander is unacceptable and adds to the perception of excessive violence sometimes used by the police,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson said.
	
	The training of public order police is an issue that has been highlighted a number of times and was explicit in the legacy report of the Portfolio Committee on Police of the fifth Parliament. This matter was also raised by the Farlam Commission. As a result, the committee will seek a detailed report on the implementation of the Panel of Experts’ recommendations made in that report, especially in relation to training police officers.
	
	Peaceful protest is protected by the Constitution and the unwarranted use of excessive force in policing protest needs to be urgently addressed by the South African Police Service management. Ms Joemat-Pettersson has called on police to always exercise restraint in dealing with public protests.
	
	Ms Joemat-Pettersson has called for the speedy completion of the investigation of the incident to ensure justice for Mr Ntumba. “I extend my heartfelt condolences to the Ntumba family and friends on their loss,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson said.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal