Parliament, Wednesday, 24 March 2021 – The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Health and Social Services, Ms Maurencia Gillion, has wished all the tuberculosis (TB) patients a speedy recovery today, as the world commemorates World Tuberculosis Day.
	
	Each year, TB Day is commemorated to raise public awareness about the devastating health, social and economic consequences of TB and to step up efforts to defeat the global TB epidemic. TB Day marks the day in 1882 when Dr Robert Koch announced that he had discovered the bacterium that causes TB. This opened the way towards diagnosing and curing the disease.
	
	According to the World Health Organisation (WHO), TB remains one of the world’s deadliest infectious killers. Each day, people lose lives to TB and close to 28 000 people around the world fall ill with this preventable and curable disease. The theme of WHO TB Day 2021 is “The Clock is Ticking”, emphasising that world leaders are running out of time to act on the commitments they made to end TB.
	
	Ms Gillion said: “The committee wishes all the TB patients on this day a speedy recovery. Furthermore, we send well wishes all the healthcare workers who sacrifice their lives in their commitment to healing patients suffering from TB, Covid-19-related illnesses and other illnesses, including incurable illnesses.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES, MS MAURENCIA GILLION.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Yoliswa Landu (Ms)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng