Parliament, Wednesday, 3 March 2021 – The Standing Committee on Public Accounts (Scopa) today was scheduled to hold a hearing with Eskom on expansions and deviations for the financial year of 2020/21, annual report for 2019/20 and investigations by the Special Investigating Unit (SIU).
	
	Scopa suspended today’s hearing in order to consult with the Parliamentary Legal Services on the appropriate approach when conducting the investigative inquiry.
	
	Last week Scopa had to adjourn the hearing with Eskom early and reschedule it for today at the request of Eskom, who were not ready to present on some of the issues on the agenda. However, in that meeting, when Scopa was dealing with expansions and deviations, it emerged that the chief procurement officer (CPO) of Eskom had been suspended.
	
	Yesterday Scopa received correspondence from the CPO, which had a materal bearing on the matters which the committee would have dealt with in today’s hearing. Some of the allegations contained in yesterday’s letter were brought to the attention of the Board of Eskom as far back as February 2020. The committee will be investigating the very serious allegations levelled against the group chief executive officer (GCEO) of Eskom specifically, as well as procurement and contract management in general. The GCEO will be granted an opportunity to respond to those allegations.
	
	While Eskom is proceeding with their internal matters, Scopa also has a duty to conduct oversight over the power utility. Scopa will determine a way forward after it receives the necessary legal advice.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF SCOPA, MR MKHULEKO HLENGWA.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape