Parliament, Tuesday 9 March 2021 – The National Assembly (NA) and the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will tomorrow, Wednesday 10 March, hold separate plenary sittings to consider the Finance Committees Reports on the Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals.
	
	The Fiscal Framework and Revenue Proposals was tabled together with the 2021/2022 Budget by the Finance Minister on 24 February. The Fiscal Framework is a framework for a specific financial year that gives effect to the national executive’s macro-economic policy and it includes amongst others estimates of all revenue, budgetary and extra budgetary specified separately, expected to be raised during that financial year and estimates of borrowing for that financial year.
	
	At its plenary sitting, the NA is also scheduled for a Questions for Oral Reply session by Ministers in the Social Services Cluster (2). The cluster is comprised of Ministers of Basic Education; Health; Higher Education, Science and Innovation; Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation; Social Development; and Sports, Arts and Culture.
	
	The series of questions to be answered by the Ministers during the session can be accessed by clicking the link here.
	
	Meanwhile the NCOP will be considering the National Gambling Amendment Bill at the same sitting.
	
	NCOP VIRTUAL SITTING:
	Date: Wednesday, 10 March 2021
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Online platform
	
	NA HYBRID SITTING:
	Date: Wednesday, 10 March 2021
	Time: 15:00
	Venue: National Assembly Chamber, Parliament and online platform
	
	Important to note:
	
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA hybrid sitting should send their details (full name, media house, ID or passport number) to Manelisi Ntsodo on email: mntsodo@parliament.gov.za by no later than 10 am TOMORROW, Wednesday, 10 March.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African Independent Congress