The Co-Chairperson of the Joint Standing Committee on the Financial Management of Parliament, Ms Dikeledi Mahlangu, has reaffirmed in principle the committee’s support for Parliament’s move from Cape Town to Pretoria in Gauteng. Ms Mahlangu said that although the committee is mindful of certain onerous processes that still need to be followed before a move could take place, the committee is in full support of the idea. She said: “We share the same understanding with those Members of Parliament who hold a view that Parliament should move from Cape Town to Pretoria and we appreciate the fact that a commitment has been made on the side of the institution regarding this matter.” Ms Mahlangu further said there was no need for the committee to debate the matter, saying the Acting Secretary to Parliament, Ms Baby Tyawa, should rather provide a progress report on a regular basis. Ms Tyawa, on the other hand, told the committee that as far as she was concerned, the move is being handled by the executive authority of Parliament. “We can reassure you, Honourable Members, that we will bring this matter to the attention of the executive authority so that they can provide us with an update,” said Ms Tyawa. The Speaker of the 5th Parliament, Ms Baleka Mbete, announced in May 2018 during her budget speech that Parliament had appointed Phamoja PTY Ltd to conduct a six-month socio-economic and impact study on the proposed move from Cape Town to Pretoria, commencing from that month. Ms Mbete stated at the time that the process was anticipated to be onerous and that some work would have to be handed over to the 6th Parliament. Today, the matter came to light again during a meeting of the committee, that was briefed on the institution’s third quarter performance in the 2020/21 financial year. It became apparent during the presentation that Parliament’s operating environment continues to be impacted by significant budget cuts and Covid-19. The institution met seven of its indicator targets in the quarter under review, which amounted to 87.5% achievement. It spent R510.3 million of its appropriated budget of R583.7 million, amounting to 87% performance. Ms Tyawa, however, brought to the attention of the committee the fact that indications were there that the institution be underspending by R120.5 million or 6% of its R2.1 billion budget at the end of the 2020/21 financial year. By Justice Molafo 12 March 2021 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal