MEDIA ADVISORY: DEPUTY PRESIDENT DAVID MABUZA TO ANSWER QUESTIONS IN THE NCOP AND THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY TO CONVENE MINI-PLENARY SESSIONS
	
	Parliament, Wednesday 10 March 2021 – Deputy President Mr David Mabuza will appear in the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) hybrid plenary tomorrow to provide oral replies to questions from delegates to the House while the National Assembly (NA) will convene virtual Mini-plenaries to debate various maters of national importance.
	
	Questions for Oral Reply sessions are one of the mechanisms Parliament uses in order to hold the Executive to account - as stipulated in Section 92(2) of the Constitution that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of powers and performance of their functions.
	
	For the full list of questions, please click:
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/fc039405-2fe0-467b-a887-e5e8f13a0b99.pdf
	
	Details of the virtual NCOP plenary are as follows:
	
	Date: Thursday, 11 March 2021
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: NCOP Chamber and Virtual platforms
	
	The NA and the NCOP tomorrow morning at 08.30 will convene their virtual Programming Committee meetings to consider their term programmes, reports of committees, and Bills before both Houses.
	
	Meanwhile, the NA will hold mini-plenaries on eight important topics for discussion tomorrow, Thursday 11 March at 14.00 and Friday 12 March at 10.00.
	
	Among the subjects for discussion are: National Assembly Rule 49 (1) makes provision for the Speaker to refer matters for consideration in mini-plenaries after due deliberation of views and direction of the Programme Committee. A mini-plenary session may proceed with its business irrespective of the number of members participating. Details of the NA Virtual sittings are as follows: Dates: Thursday 11 March 2021
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: Virtual Platform Dates: Friday 12 March 2021
	Time: 10.00
	Venue: Virtual Platform Important to note:
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NCOP Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za. Members of the media who wish to observe the NA virtual sitting and the Programme Committee Meetings of both houses should forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi onmmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists must forward their requests using their official email addresses (no private emails). Members of the public may follow the proceedings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via the live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel, Facebook and Twitter pages. Please see links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds. Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape