Parliament, Sunday 21 March 2021 – The Presiding Officers of Parliament, led by the Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise and the Chairperson of the National Council of Province, Mr Amos Masondo, join South Africans in commemorating Human Rights Day.
	
	Historically, this Day is linked to the tragic events that unfolded in Sharpeville on 21 March 1960. On that day, 69 people died and another 180 were injured, when police opened fire on a peaceful protest against the apartheid government’s discriminatory and dehumanising Pass Laws.
	
	Human Rights Day is also a reminder of the importance of our hard-won human rights and freedoms as well as the price paid to attain and protect them in the Constitution of our non-racial, democratic South Africa.
	
	The Constitution – the supreme law of our country – lists these human rights and freedoms in its Bill of Rights. As former President Nelson Mandela once reminded the nation: “Our … Constitution … must enshrine all the basic freedoms and rights which will ensure that South Africa becomes a model of democracy, stability and human advancement”.
	
	Human Rights Day is also an opportunity to assess how far we have come in entrenching these human rights and values, particularly as we continue to combat the deadly COVID-19 pandemic. This month marks a year since the outbreak of the pandemic in our country in 2020. The pandemic has affected and threatened the lively hood of the nation especially the poor and vulnerable. Importantly, this period has also taught us valuable lessons: through collective effort and human solidarity, the spread of the virus can be contained and emerging from its destruction stronger as a nation is possible.
	
	We are all too aware that much needs to be done to reduce and eliminate the still lingering inequalities in our society that undermines our democratic rights.
	
	COVID-19 and the need to lessen its spread and health risks has brought these social ills into sharper focus and exacerbated the inequality and poverty, corruption, gender discrimination and gender-based violence still plaguing our society.
	
	Parliament is mindful of the role it must play and commits to fulfilling this role.
	
	This includes keeping a close eye on Executive action, passing laws and providing an opportunity for the public to voice their views on issues affecting their daily lives. Parliament is closely monitoring the distribution of the vaccines to all South Africans through oversight mechanisms to start rebuilding the economy. Universal access to all Covid-19 lifesaving services is crucial to ensure the protection of everyone's right to life, livelihoods and socio-economic restoration.
	
	The effort, through the Zondo Commission of Inquiry into Allegations of State Capture, to fight corruption must be appreciated. Corruption compromises states' ability to fulfil its obligation to South Africans, particularly the poor, and undermines the human rights of all individuals.
	
	Intensifying the war against COVID-19, crime, corruption and other social ills such as gender-based violence is instrumental to the success of any nation and its development programme. Striving together, we can make Striving together, we can make the South Africa a better nation.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape