Parliament, Friday, 19 March 2021 – The Ad Hoc Committee on section 100 Intervention in the North West Province has concluded its week-long oversight visit to the province and has re-emphasised the need for law enforcement agencies to move with speed to prosecute those identified to have been involved with malfeasance and plundering the province’s resources.
	
	“The confidence of the people of North West in their government can only be regained when they see headway in prosecutions of wrongdoers. To this effect, the committee welcomes the capacitation of the National Prosecution Authority with skilled prosecutors to ensure effective oversight,” said Mr China Dodovu, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The committee has also urged the entire criminal justice system to increase investigative capacity in the province as they work to ensure that every act of malfeasance is repaid with harsh sentences. “The committee has requested the case numbers of all cases reported to the Saps [South African Police Service], which the committee will use to query the agencies and the executive on the progress in completing those investigations,” Mr Dodovu emphasised.
	
	Meanwhile, the committee remains concerned about the hostile relationship between the administrators, the provincial executive and the legislature. This frosty relationship delays and impedes progress in improving the province’s fortunes. To this end, the committee reiterates its call for relationship protocols to be standardised. This will provide a framework for the structure of the relationship going forward.
	
	The committee also urged the government of the North West to think only of how to deliver efficient and quality service delivery to the people of the province. “Collaboration towards this goal of delivery of quality services must be the most important thing,” Mr Dodovu emphasised.
	
	Upon receipt of all the reports it has requested, the committee will meet to consider the way forward and the recommendations it will table before the National Council of Provinces.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE ON SECTION 100 INTERVENTION IN THE NORTH WEST PROVINCE, MR CHINA DODOVU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape