The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry today recommended the names of three candidates to fill the position of the Chairperson of the Board of the National Lotteries Commission. Committee Chairperson, Mr Duma Nkosi, said the names of Mr T Tselane, Dr N Pityana and Dr M Madzivhandila will be sent to the National Assembly for consideration before they are sent to the Minister as a recommendation for his consideration. A list of 41 nominated candidates was referred to by the Speaker of the National Assembly to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry after she had received a letter from the Minister of Trade and Industry nominating candidates for the position and requesting the relevant committee to make a recommendation.  The committee shortlisted eight candidates – Rev F Chikane, Ms B Fergusan, Mr T Dlamini, Dr M Madzivhandila, Dr N Pityana, Mr A Trikamjee, Mr T Tselane and Mr G Xaba – who were interviewed. Explaining the process following the conclusion of the interviews, Mr Nkosi said the committee yesterday agreed to a list of four names for Committee members to take back to their political parties for consideration in order to cut the list to the three required names. The four names were Mr T Tselane, Dr N Pityana, Dr M Madzivhandila and Mr T Dlamini. During today’s deliberations the multi-party committee came to an agreement on two of the candidates, however they were split on a third candidate and a vote had to take place. The ANC and EFF were in favour of Dr Madzivhandila. The DA, however, felt that Dr Madzivhandila was a board member when the NLC experienced serious challenges. Mr Dean Macpherson of the DA said the board was on a “meltdown” and epic corruption took place whilst Dr Madzivandila was a board member. “During the interview he spoke more about brand management than how to rid the NLC of corruption.” Mr Wayne Thring (ACDP) said the party applied its mind after careful consideration of all the concerns raised about Dr Madzivandila. Both the DA and ANC preferred Mr Dlamini as a candidate. Ms Yoliswa Yako (EFF) was adamant that these matters did not arise during the interviews and the further shortlisting to the list of four names should not be considered now. Ms Judy Hermans of the ANC was in full agreement and between the two parties they voted 7 to 4 in favour of Dr Madzivandila. Mr Nkosi said: “During today’s consideration of the names, Mr Tselane had the support of all fives political parties represented on the committee and Dr Pityana had the support of four parties. The committee went into a vote on the third candidate as they each initially received the support of two parties. During voting Dr Madzivhandila received more votes than Mr Dlamini and was therefore included as the third candidate.” By Rajaa Azzakani 12 March 2021 A joint committee of Parliament monitors improvements in the quality of life and status of women in South Africa. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng