Parliament, Saturday, 13 March 2021 – The Chairperson of the Select Committee on Education, Technology, Sports, Arts and Culture, Mr Elleck Nchabeleng, has welcomed the commitment shown by some universities to extend the registration period until the end of March 2021. Mr Nchabeleng said all universities ought not have doubts and should follow suit, as such action was humane, sensible and an act of Ubuntu. He said: “Given the challenges and awkwardness of this academic year, it makes perfect sense to allow students enough time to be part of the university community. The committee is concerned with the claims that students are being academically excluded and denied registration.” “We call on the National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) to timeously process funding applications particularly for first-year and deserving NSFAS funded students. An acknowledgement of debt should be entered into with those that do not qualify,” added Mr Nchabeleng. The Department of Higher Education, Science and Technology announced during the week that it will rearrange its budget to ensure that no NSFAS deserving student is financially excluded and left unregistered. Mr Nchabeleng said NSFAS funding for this year should be geared towards assisting virtual learning and that unnecessary allowances like travelling should be discontinued, and that accommodation allowance should be paid only if it is really warranted. The committee condemns all forms of vandalism on university campuses, and all forms of provocation against law enforcement officers. Equally, the committee condemns the use of force against protesting students. Mr Nchabeleng called upon the police and campus security officers to resist any temptation to use force as campuses ought to be safe learning spaces. “We should spare no effort in helping needy students and make this academic year a success,” emphasised Mr Nchabeleng. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION, TECHNOLOGY, SPORTS, ARTS AND CULTURE, MR ELLECK NCHABELENG. For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	Email: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng