Parliament, Wednesday, 7 April 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, has noted with concern the fuel price hike which came at the back of electricity tariff hike.
	
	Mr Luzipo believes that the hikes in fuel and electricity will undoubtably have negative socio-economic impact on the livelihood of many South Africans.
	
	He said: “These hikes are unimaginable, considering that they come at a time when the country is still reeling from the devastating socio-economic setbacks caused by the Covid-19 pandemic.”
	
	Mr Luzipo further said the hikes will negatively affect the poor and working class who will have to bear the brunt of escalating prices of food and transport.
	
	“The impact of these hikes will be unbearable in poor communities because most people rely on public transport to access health services, and often the taxi industry increases fares when there is fuel price hike,” said Mr Luzipo.
	
	He, however, made an appeal to all sectors of the economy, including mining, transport and sellers of fast-moving consumer goods not to increase prices as that could only serve to put more burden on the working class and the poor.
	
	Mr Luzipo also advised employers not to resort to retrenching workers as a mechanism to absorb possible escalating operational costs.
	
	Next week the committee will be briefed on the Basic Fuel Price (BFP) by the Department of Mineral Resources and Energy. The Automobile Association (AA) will also be present.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga