Parliament, Friday, 16 April 2021 – The Chairperson of the Multi-Party Women’s Caucus (MPWC) has condemned in the strongest possible terms the bullying of a girl learner in Limpopo, which subsequently led the young girl taking her own life.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Ms Nkhensani Kate Bilankulu, said: “The MPWC strongly discouraged this as such actions can also lead and add to the statistics of gender-based violence (GBV). South Africa already has staggering numbers in terms of GBV and we cannot allow for this to escalate. We are appealing to the parents and educators to be vigilant in attending to issue of this nature.”
	
	In the video that was shared on social media, the learner, from Mbilwi Secondary School in the Vhembe East Education District, is confronted by two other girls. One starts slapping the alleged victim several times. The victim is seen grabbing her attacker in an attempt to block the blows from the assault. Other learners can be heard in the background cheering the alleged perpetrator, who allegedly is also in Grade 10.
	
	The Limpopo Education Department later confirmed the incident and said the victim has since passed away. The 15-year-old attacker has been arrested and charged with assault.
	
	“It was particularly concerning to witness girl-on-girl violence in this case. This speaks to what happens in our society. We need to educate our girl-children to uplift one another as they are the mothers of tomorrow, holding the future of the next generation in their hands. They should stand together instead against GBV,” said Ms Bilankulu.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE MULTI-PARTY WOMEN’S CAUCUS, MS NKHENSANI KATE BILANKULU.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Political parties represented in Parliament are entitled to an amount of public money for their political activities. The parties receive the money in proportion to the number of seats they hold. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo