Parliament, Wednesday 21 April 2021 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) is scheduled to hold a plenary sitting tomorrow.
	
	The NCOP sitting, on a virtual platform, is scheduled to consider the Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Amendment Bill and the Correctional Services Amendment Bill .
	
	The Correctional Services Amendment Bill aims to amend the Correctional Services Act, 1998 (Act No. 111 of 1998), so as to amend the definition of “Minister” to align it with the portfolio(s) assigned by the President from time to time. It further seeks to
	to amend the Act by inserting, deleting and amending certain provisions related to the placement of sentenced offenders under day parole, parole and correctional supervision.
	
	Date: Thursday, 22 April 2021
	Time: 10:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Parliamentary sittings are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal