Parliament, Wednesday, 7 April 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology, Mr Philly Mapulane, notes with disappointment and frustration the student protest that is taking place at the Durban University of Technology today.
	
	According to media reports the protest erupted after the university issued a media statement today communicating its decision to immediately suspend on-campus support for online registration after it noted that there were a number of unauthorised social media posts inviting all applicants to come to the campuses yesterday.
	
	Many potential applicants arrived at the university gates today, expecting to be registered. The persons were not invited by the university to register, nor given any indication that they were to arrive at the university. All along, the university has been using a strict Covid-19 compliant system where those struggling with online registration would report their experiences via the telephone, and where necessary, be invited and granted permits.
	
	Mr Mapulane has called for constructive engagement between the university management, university council and students through their representative council to ensure that both parties reach an amicable solution to challenges that face the university. Furthermore, Mr Mapulane said no challenge can be beyond their capacity to resolve.
	
	Mr Mapulane added: “The committee appeals to all the leaders at the university to maintain peace at all the university campuses. We are appealing to everyone to avoid the use of force and violence at the university.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILLY MAPULANE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Mava Lukani
	Tel: 021 403 8738Cell: 081 503 1840Email: mlukani@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga