Parliament, Thursday, 15 April 2021 – Mpumalanga became the second province, after Limpopo, to be visited by the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure for public hearings on the Expropriation Bill. Today the committee met with the communities of Bushbuckridge Local Municipality in the province’s Ehlanzeni District, as part of the ongoing nationwide public consultations on the Expropriation Bill. The committee listened to submissions from different stakeholders which included members of political parties, traditional leaders, organised labour, farmers and civic organisations, among others. There were mixed feelings from community members, with some supporting the draft legislation while others felt that processing the Expropriation Bill should be put on hold until Parliament has concluded amending Section 25 of the Constitution to allow for expropriation of land without compensation. The purpose of the Expropriation Bill is to repeal the existing Expropriation Act of 1975 to provide a common framework in line with the Constitution to guide the processes and procedures for the expropriation of property for a public purpose and in the public interest, and to provide for certain instances where expropriation with nil compensation may be appropriate in the public interest. Tomorrow the committee will hold public hearings in the City of Mbombela Local Municipality at the Mbombela Civic Centre Hall, from 10h00. On Saturday the hearings will be held in the Msukaligwa Local Municipality under the Gert Sibande District, and on Sunday the committee will conclude its programme in the province with public hearings in the Thembisile Hani Local Municipality, under the Nkangala District Municipality. The public hearings will be held under strict Covid-19 guidelines and regulations. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INFRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBONGWANA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure, please contact: Name: Sakhile MokoenaCell: 081 705 2130
	Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance