Parliament, Tuesday, 27 April 2021 – The Presiding Officers of Parliament, led by the Speaker of the National Assembly, Ms Thandi Modise, and the Chairperson of the National Council of Province, Mr Amos Masondo, join South Africans in commemorating Freedom Day.
	
	On this day 27 years ago, millions of South Africans cast their vote in the first democratic elections as equals choosing a government of their choice. This day marked the liberation of our country and its people from white minority domination, discrimination, division and conflict – a period known as apartheid. It is a day characterised by fervent hope for unity and the restoration of the dignity of all South Africans.
	
	Blood had been shed, people suffered, too many lives lost under the cruel apartheid regime and the people’s demand for freedom could not be denied any more. This day brought hope and boundless possibilities, as people woke up that day to vote and make the cross that would change their lives.
	
	This year’s Freedom Day comes when South Africa is still dealing with Covid-19 and its devastation – the social and economic disruptions. The pandemic has worsened unemployment and poverty continues to strip people of their dignity. The battle against corruption and looting of state resources, on the other hand, must continue to be intensified as a means to preserve people’s freedoms.
	
	Parliament will continuously sharpen its oversight and executive accountability role to fight pervasive corruption to ensure public resources serve the people and not a few unscrupulous individuals. If South Africans are to say “we are free”, this must include emancipation from poverty and unemployment, as well as racism, sexism and other forms of discrimination.
	
	The theme for the 6th Parliament is “Following up on our commitments to the people”. As a people’s Parliament, it is the responsibility of the institution to follow up on the promises made to the people in order to realise a truly free and democratic South Africa. Our task is to ensure that laws passed by Parliament are aligned with the vision of the Constitution and to continue holding the executive accountable for its promise to restore dignity to all the people of this country.
	
	Freedom and security of the person, freedom of religion, belief and opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of association are some of the rights enshrined in our Constitution in the Bill of Rights. Twenty-seven years into democracy, South Africa and its constitutional institutions continue to ensure the protection of these rights.
	
	“Parliament will continue to ensure the restoration of dignity to all South Africans through its legislative processes, especially the vulnerable groups, women and children. The passing of the Gender-Based Violence Bills and the recent Upgrading of Land Tenure Rights Act Amendment Bill (ULTRA) are among the interventions Parliament is making to restore people’s dignity and undo the past injustices,” said the Presiding Officers.
	
	The ULTRA Bill seeks to restore the dignity of women to be independent property owners without male representation and allows former residents of apartheid homelands to benefit equally, like all South Africans, from land ownership conversions.
	
	On this day, through the instruments at our disposal under the Constitution, Parliament commits to continue making South Africa a better country to live in for all. Freedom was attained through bloodshed and great sacrifices, and we must make it count for all South Africans. Our task is to ensure that all our people enjoy their freedom with dignity.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal