Parliament, Thursday, 15 April 2021 – The NCOP Chief Whip, Mr Seiso Mohai, is delighted to see that the Botshabelo Industrial Park in the Free State will attract more investors through its revitalisation programme, which promotes industrialisation in the township to address inequalities created by the apartheid regime.
	
	For the past two days, Mr Mohai, accompanied by the Deputy Speaker of the National Assembly, Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, and Free State Provincial Whip, Mr Itumeleng Ntsube undertook an oversight visit to Botshabelo Industrial Park to monitor and evaluate progress and its impact in the revitalisation of the township economy in the Free State. This was part of their constituency work.
	
	The Botshabelo Industrial Park is part of the Department of Trade, Industry and Competition’s Revitalisation of Industrial Parks Programme. It is implemented throughout the country to renovate state-owned industrial parks in historically disadvantaged areas.
	
	The delegation was briefed by many stakeholders, including the Deputy Minister of Trade, Industry and Competition, Ms Nomalungelo Gina, and the Chief Whip of the Manguang Metropolitan Municipality, Mr Zolile Mangcotywa, on the progress made and the crucial role the park has in advancing the economy.
	
	The revamping of Botshabelo Industrial Park has attracted investments of over R500 million and so far has created more than 5 000 direct job opportunities. 108 of 144 factories in the park are occupied and fully operational, increasing the park occupancy rate to more than 76,5 percent.
	
	“The revitalisation of the township economy and projects in place have changed the image of Botshabelo Industrial Park and the perception many business people had about it. According to the presentations made to us, clearly more investors are in the pipeline,” said Mr Mohai.
	
	The delegation was also happy to see that the park’s state-of-the-art digital hub is fully operational. Mr Mohai noted that the hub has received R5 million in funding from the Small Enterprise Development Agency (Seda), situated in the Department of Small Business Development. The delegation was pleased to hear that Seda is currently hosting activations and boot camps in Thaba Nchu, Botshabelo and other areas surrounding Bloemfontein, to create awareness about the digital hub and to identify young people who will receive training at the hub, as part of developing entrepreneurs in innovation to equip them for the Fourth Industrial Revolution.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chief Whip of the NCOP, Mr Seiso Mohai, please contact: Mr Mlindi Mpindi – 081 716 7329
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE NCOP CHIEF WHIP MR SEISO MOHAPI Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng