Parliament, Thursday, 8 April 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Works and Infrastructure has successfully completed the first of its four legged public hearings on the Expropriation Bill [B23-2020] in Limpopo province.
	
	The public hearing was conducted in line with the Covid-19 protocols at the Thohoyandou Town Hall and majority of participants from different organisations supported the Bill. They called for immediate enactment and implementation in its current form.
	
	The Expropriation Bill was introduced to Parliament in November 2020 by the Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure.
	
	It seeks to provide for the expropriation of property for a public purpose or in the public interest and provide for certain instances where expropriation with nil compensation may be appropriate in the public interest.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Nolitha Ntobogwana, said that the current public hearings represent the third phase in the work of the committee to process the Bill. The first and second phases took place in December last year and February 2021 respectively.
	
	Tomorrow, 9 April 2021, the committee will continue with public hearings in Mopani region at the Lenyenye Community Hall. The Waterberg and Capricorn regions will be visited on Saturday and Sunday respectively.
	
	“We would like to thank all the participants and promise to consider each presentation during committee deliberations,” said Ms Ntobogwana.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC WORKS AND INTRASTRUCTURE, MS NOLITHA NTOBOGWANA. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 748
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal