Media was referred to as the fourth estate two centuries ago in Europe largely because of its role in society. Parliament, as the legislature, needs the media to carry its constitutional mandate – and partnership with the media should be deliberate rather than by chance or accidental. That was what Mr Koffi Kouakou, of the Institute for Advancement of Journalism (IAJ) told the chairpersons of the parliamentary committees and provincial whips during a two-day media training that took place recently virtually. Mr Kouakou defined media as a go-between or a mediator. He said it is a tool of communication which is there for the committee chairpersons and Members of Parliament (MPs) to use as a strategic tool to communicate the work and programmes of Parliament to the citizens. “I urge you to get a sense of how to use the media to enhance your work. Understand more about the media to use your power and influence,” he said. He likened the media to midwives of communication and an information broker. He advised the chairpersons and whips to determine the narrative for the media and said the State of the Nation Address (SONA) and the budget speech which is going to be delivered by the Minister of Finance immediately after the delivery of the SONA were the right occasions to do this. The chairpersons and whips highlighted some of the obstacles that diminish any opportunity of partnership between them with the media. Those obstacles, according to the chairpersons, included the hostility of the media towards Parliament and the tendency of the print media to distort parliamentary stories. Mr Kouakou advised MPs to maintain and manage their relationship with the media. He said they must do so by, among other things, keeping close interaction with newsrooms and talking to journalists on a regular basis. “Visit media houses and go twice in a year to them for example,” he said. He said the distortion of parliamentary stories and adversarial relationship happen because MPs are strangers to journalists. “They don’t know you, that’s why they lie about you. Expose their lies,” emphasised Mr Kouakou. Mr Kouakou highlighted the problem of the ignorance of the chairpersons to respond to media deadlines particularly on topical issues. Among the reasons that cause this problem, according to Mr Lukhona Mnguni, one of the KwaZulu-Natal-based political analysts and who shared his insights with the chairpersons and whips during the day-two media training, is political hierarchy. He said chairpersons wait for Luthuli House (headquarters of the ANC) to pronounce on the issue first, and then toe the line. Mr Mnguni said the consultation of the headquarters by the chairpersons compromises the work of committees. In most cases newsrooms go to print without the voice of Parliament on a very important issue. Mr Mnguni advised the chairpersons to turn the hostile tension that exists between the media and Parliament into a constructive one to ensure that they use the media to amplify their messages, particularly on legislation which he said is their primary responsibility. As Parliament is the site of democracy, media is an important ingredient of that democracy, he said. Mr Mnguni said sometimes tension between the media and MPs is perpetuated by the failure of the MPs to separate the media from public discourse and the plurality of views that is promoted by democracy. He said the MPs are unable to see the line that exists there and attribute those views to the media. He said the media is a vehicle that distributes public views. The chairpersons, one after another, appreciated Mr Mnguni’s insight and advice on how they should deal with the media. They told him and Mr Kouakou that they would emerge from the training with a totally new perspective and insight about the media. Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa, who is the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour, thanked Mr Mnguni for, among other things, indicating the shortcomings of the chairpersons. “You have exposed our weaknesses and thank you for that,” added Ms Dunjwa. The chairpersons and the provincial whips agreed that media training of MPs needs to take place regularly. By Mava Lukani
	28 January 2021 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng