Parliament, Monday, 8 February 2021 – Parliament wishes to thank all members of the media that applied to cover the hybrid Joint Sitting of the State of the Nation Address on Thursday, 11 February 2021 at 7 pm.
	
	The Joint Sitting of the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces will be held in a hybrid format as part of efforts to adhere to the National State of Disaster lockdown regulations – Alert Level 3. No more than 50 participants will be allowed inside the National Assembly Chamber. All other Members of Parliament and guests will connect through a virtual platform.
	
	Parliament received 435 media accreditation applications to cover SONA 2021. However, given the stringent Covid-19 regulations, members of the media are advised that only ten (10) seats have been reserved for media representatives in the National Assembly public gallery. At least three (3) main national broadcasters are confirmed to cover the event live, alongside the Parliament TV on DSTV Channel 408, while Parliament will also provide clean broadcast feed – video and audio - to other broadcasters, and carry the proceedings live on Parliament’s social media accounts such as YouTube as well. This is done to ensure that the business of Parliament is conducted openly and transparently while adhering to the lockdown level 3 protocols.
	
	The ten (10) names of media personnel to cover the 2021 hybrid SONA have been confirmed through consultations with the Parliamentary Press Gallery Association (PGA) for proper representation of the media houses. An additional 20 spaces for media are reserved for operating within the Parliamentary precinct (outside of the chamber). Some members of the PGA will operate from their offices, and appropriate officials will be deployed to assist with ensuring compliance with this provisions and regulations and also to assist media when required.
	
	All accredited media to work in the precinct on the day of SONA to collect their tags as follows:
	
	Date: Monday, 8 February until Wednesday, 10 February
	Time: 09:00 to 15:30
	Venue: Multi Media Centre, Tour Section Room, 90 Plein Street Building, Upper Ground floor. 
	NB: NO ACCREDITATION TAGS WILL BE ISSUED ON THURSDAY, 11 FEBRUARY 2021.
	
	Other accredited Media, who do not form part of the above categories are advised to take up other limited spaces provided on the first come first served basis on an online Zoom webinar. A Zoom webinar has been identified as the best online platform for the event as it allows a larger audience to be part of SONA. Webinar invitations will be sent to all accredited journalist.
	
	The coverage of the proceedings will also be streamed live, on Parliament website (www.parliament.gov.za).
	
	ACCREDITED LIST OF MEDIA FOR SONA 2021 AVAILABLE ON PARLIAMENT WEBSITE
	Please find the list here https://www.parliament.gov.za/state-nation-2021-media-accreditation
	
	Parliament once again wishes to thank the media for its understanding, patience and continued support and collaboration during these unprecedented tough times.
	
	For enquires regarding the webinar link please contact:
	• Masego Dlula (mdlula@parliament.gov.za), 081 715 9398)
	• Nolizwi Magwagwa (nmagwagwa@parliament.gov.za) 081 716 5824)
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. African National Congress