Parliament, Friday, 19 February 2021 – The Standing Committee on the Auditor-General (SCOAG) has welcomed the second special report on the financial management of government’s Covid-19 initiatives.
	
	The committee welcomes the strides made by the Auditor-General (AG) in building strong stakeholder relationships with accounting officers and executive authorities in an effort to ensure implementation and strengthening of preventative controls as they deal with the increased risks and changes in their operations.
	
	The committee also appreciates the collaboration with the fusion centre, which will allow the office to coordinate with all state law enforcement institutions to prevent, detect and respond to allegations of corruption or related activities for the Covid-19 pandemic. The committee hopes that this collaboration will fast-track consequence management for those who have exploited the pandemic.
	
	The committee remains concerned that significant deficiencies in the procurement and contract management processes have been noted in this second special audit. The AG has also noted inadequate controls to ensure that payments are only made for goods and services that are delivered at the right time, price and quality. The AG also raised a concern about unfairness in the awarding of government business and that sufficient care is not taken to protect against overpricing, financial loss, fraud and abuse of the system.
	
	These are just a few concerns amongst others that the AG presented to the committee today. The committee greatly appreciated the work the AG and her team are doing in the process of this special audit. These special audit reports will assist Parliament, as an oversight body, to zoom in on the areas of concern that have been highlighted.
	
	The committee also formally welcomed the new AG, Ms Tsakani Maluleke to its first meeting since her appointment. The committee is looking forward to a great working relationship with her.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE AUDITOR-GENERAL, MR SAKHUMZI SOMYO.
	
	For media enquiries, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Faith Ndenze
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8062
	Cell: 081 377 0686
	Email: fndenze@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng