Parliament, Thursday 18 February 2021 – The National Council of Provinces (NCOP) Deputy Chairperson Ms Sylvia Lucas and National Assembly (NA) Deputy Speaker Mr Lechesa Tsenoli, will tomorrow host the 1994 Women’s Charter Review virtual sessions in KwaZulu-Natal (KZN).
	
	Ms Lucas and Mr Tsenoli will host the Harry Gwala and Ilembe District Municipalities in a morning session and the King Cetshwayo, Ugu and Umgungundlovu District Municipalities will join the afternoon session.
	
	Last Friday, the focus was on KZN’s Umkhanyakude, Umzinyathi, Uthukela and Zululand District Municipalities and Mpumalanga’s Ehlanzeni District Municipality.
	
	The 1994 Women’s Charter Review sessions aim at taking stock of the progress made in implementing the 1994 Women’s Charter for Effective Equality and to assess its impact since the advent of freedom and democracy.
	
	Upon completion of the provincial review sessions in the last three remaining provinces – KZN, Mpumalanga and the Western Cape – Parliament will host Women’s Charter Review High-Level Sessions. These sessions will report back to the provincial and local government leadership on feedback received following engagements with stakeholders from a number of District Municipalities in provinces.
	
	DETAILS OF THE WOMEN’S CHARTER REVIEW MORNING SESSION
	Date: Friday, 19 February
	Time: 9:00 – 12:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	DETAILS OF THE WOMEN’S CHARTER REVIEW AFTERNOON SESSION
	Date: Friday, 19 February
	Time: 12:00 – 15:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Members of the media who wish to observe the sessions may forward their contact details to Mr Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the virtual engagement live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), through live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng