Parliament, Monday, 8 February 2021 – The Ad Hoc Committee on the section 100 Intervention in the North West Province has today agreed in principle, on a plan on how it will implement its mandate of assessing progress and the impact of the Section 100 intervention in the North West Province.
	
	Some of the pertinent matters that it will focus on include the briefings from the Chairperson of the Inter-Ministerial Task Team on progress and impact of the intervention into the affairs of the province, the National Treasury and the Auditor-General regarding financial management within the provincial government, as well as the briefing by the Special Investigating Unit, the Directorate for Priority Crime Investigation (HAWKS) and the National Prosecuting Authority on progress in prosecuting the identified alleged wrongdoers in the collapse of the provincial departments that are under administration.
	
	“The central pillar of our work is to oversee that the intervention has borne the necessary fruits for the benefit of the people of the North West. In discharging this mandate, we need to look at matters holistically including if consequence management has been applied against wrongdoers,” said Mr China Dodovu, the Chairperson of the Committee.
	
	Following Cabinet’s decision of December 2020 to withdraw the intervention, it was important for Parliament to assess the progress already made and the impact of the intervention on the lives of the people of the province.
	
	The Ad Hoc Committee was set up following a recommendation that was made by an Ad Hoc Committee that was established during the fifth Parliament, that the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) must, while the intervention continues, review the intervention regularly and make any appropriate recommendations to the national executive. It is for this reason that the sixth Parliament has established this committee on 8 December 2020. The committee is expected to finalise its work and report to the NCOP by 27 March 2021.
	
	The committee intends, as part of its programme, to visit North West to find out if there are tangible results arising from the intervention.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AC-HOC COMMITTEE ON SECTION 100 INTERVENTION IN NORTH WEST, MR CHINA DODOVU
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape