Parliament, Thursday, 18 February 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Police is confident that, through its intervention and insistence, the longstanding DNA case exhibit backlog and the dysfunction at the National Forensic Science Laboratory will soon be resolved. After a period of almost four years, there appears to be light at the end of the tunnel with respect to the processing of DNA samples.
	
	The committee engaged the management of the South African Police Service (Saps) and the State Information Technology Agency (Sita) with the aim of finding workable solutions to the DNA backlog and the Property Control and Exhibit Management (PCEM) information system. “Following the fruitful engagement, we are now confident that there is light at the end of the tunnel. The commitments we received here are a first step towards ensuring justice to victims of gender-based violence,” said Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson.
	
	The committee is satisfied that there is a commitment to establishing a conducive working relationship between the Saps and Sita, which will ensure collaboration in developing an alternative solution to the PCEM system. The assurance that phase one of the project has been concluded is most welcome. This phase includes the activation of legacy and case information updates, barcode activation and measures to improve barcode search function.
	
	The offer by National Treasury to assist both Saps and Sita will ensure the successful completion of clearing the DNA backlog and migration towards an internal system. All stakeholders should work collaboratively and share technical skills if Saps is to be successfully weaned from external service providers, especially in critical areas of work. The committee is particularly satisfied that the new internal system developed by Sita will come on line on 6 April 2021.
	
	The committee welcomes the awarding of all outstanding contracts according to the project plan, especially for consumables that are critical in addressing the DNA backlog. The Presidency’s initiative to identify potential private-public partnerships to assist with the processing of forensic exhibits is also welcome. The matter requires an all-hands-on-deck approach to resolve.
	
	The committee reiterates its call that lengthy litigation is an unnecessary cost burden to the fiscus, which must be avoided at all cost. “The state’s finances are better directed at delivering quality service delivery to the people of this country. The criminal justice system will be better served by a Forensic Science Laboratory functioning optimally to ensure that prosecutions are scientific, evidence-based and timely,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson emphasised.
	
	The committee will, for its part, monitor the implementation of the forensic service action plan, as well as the development of the forensic exhibit management module. The matter will remain on the committee’s radar until it is concluded.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape