Parliament, Friday, 26 February 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry responsible for making a recommendation to the Minister of Trade and Industry with regard to the position of Chairperson of the Board of the National Lotteries Commission, calls for public comments on the shortlisted candidates. A list of nominated candidates was referred by the Speaker of the National Assembly to the Portfolio Committee on Trade and Industry after she had received a letter from the Minister of Trade and Industry nominating candidates for the position and requesting the relevant Committee to make a recommendation. The eight shortlisted candidates are the Rev F Chikane, Ms B Fergusan, Mr T Dlamini, Dr M Madzivhandila, Dr N Pityana, Mr A Trikamjee, Mr T Tselane and Mr G Xaba. Dr B Pityana
	 Dr MA Madzivhandila
	 Mr AH Trikamjee
	 Mr G Xaba
	 Mr T Tselane
	 Mr TTC Dlamini
	 Mrs B Ferguson
	 Rev F Chikane The committee is calling on everyone who wishes to submit comments on the candidates to forward written submissions to the Committee Secretaries, Mr A Hermans on ahermans@parliament.gov.za or Mr T Madima at tmadima@parliament.gov.za. The deadline for submissions is Monday, 8 March 2021. The CVs of the shortlisted candidates are published on the parliamentary website for your perusal on https://tinyurl.com/33nefbmn. The names of the shortlisted candidates will be security vetted and the names of the shortlisted candidates will be published for public comment. Thereafter, the committee will proceed with interviews of the shortlisted candidates. Committee Chairperson, Mr Duma Nkosi emphasised that the committee will do everything in its power to ensure that the process remains open and transparent, and that due process is followed. The committee intends to finalise its recommendation(s) to the Minister by March 2021. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON TRADE AND INDUSTRY, MR DUMA NKOSI. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape