Parliament, Monday 15 February 2021 – The National Assembly (NA) and the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will hold joint sittings on Tuesday and Wednesday to debate the State of the Nation Address, which President Cyril Ramaphosa delivered to Parliament on 11 February. The President will reply to the debate at a joint sitting on Thursday.
	
	The debate and President’s reply will take the form of hybrid sittings. In line with COVID-19 regulations, there will be a limited number of Members and media physically present in the NA Chamber and others will link up on a virtual platform.
	
	Details of the joint sittings are as follows:
	
	DEBATE ON STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS 
	Tuesday, 16 February
	14.00 – about 19.00
	NA Chamber and online platform
	
	Wednesday, 17 February
	14.00 – about 18.00
	NA Chamber and online platform
	
	PRESIDENT’S REPLY TO DEBATE 
	Thursday, 18 February
	14.00 – about 15.15
	NA Chamber and online platform
	
	COVERAGE THROUGH ONLINE PLATFORM
	
	Journalists wishing to cover the sittings through a virtual platform must forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communication Services’ WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Media must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may get involved and follow committee sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA; Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA; YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	COVERAGE FROM NA CHAMBER
	
	Photographers and media, who do not have parliamentary media access permits and wish to cover the sittings from the NA Chamber, should send their details by 10.00 tomorrow (16 February), to: Masego Dlula (mdlula@parliament.gov.za; 081 715 9398) and Nolizwi Magwagwa (nmagwagwa@parliament.gov.za; 081 716 5824). Details required are: Full name, ID/passport number, name of media organisation, designation (eg photographer, writer), email address and phone number(s), sittings you wish to cover from the NA Chamber.
	
	Space will be limited and media will be allocated on a first come first serve basis.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The Bill of Rights guarantees freedom of expression, as long as this freedom is not used as propaganda for war, incitement to violence or the advocacy of hatred based on race, ethnicity, gender or religion. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Free State