Parliament, Tuesday, 9 February 2021 – Parliament’s Presiding Officers, led by National Assembly Speaker Ms Thandi Modise and National Council of Provinces Chairperson Mr Amos Masondo, will tomorrow brief members of the media on the state of readiness to host the 2021 State of the Nation Address.
	
	The State of the Nation Address (SONA), is a Joint Sitting of the two Houses of Parliament, the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces, and is called by the President of the Republic in terms of Section 42(5) of the Constitution. It brings together the three arms of the State under one roof.
	
	Details of the media briefing are as follows:
	
	Time : 12:00
	Venue : Virtual Platform
	Date : Wednesday, 10 February 2021
	
	Members of the media who would like to be part of the Media Briefing may send their RSVPs to Manelisi Ntsodo at: mntsodo@parliament.gov.za and Mlindi Mpindi at: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za before 10:00 am on Wednesday 10 February 2021.
	
	For interaction, Journalists may pose their questions using the Parliamentary Communication Services’ WhatsApp Group. Journalists who are not part of the WhatsApp Group may forward their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the group, where login details for the Media Briefing will be shared. Journalists are urged to forward the request using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	The Media Briefing will also be live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), streamed live on the Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape