Parliament, Wednesday, 03 February 2021- The Portfolio Committee on Basic Education will tomorrow visit schools in the Eastern Cape to assess school readiness for the 2021 academic year.
	
	“The school readiness visit is even more significant this year considering the impact of Covid-19 on the 2020 academic year and the inherent risks it continues to pose going into the 2021 academic year. It is essential that through our oversight work we ensure that everything is in place to secure a safe return of students and teachers to classrooms,” said Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The intention of the oversight visits is to assess the readiness by all the stakeholders, from the national Department of Basic Education to the school level to ensure safe reopening of schools for the 2021 Academic Year. As part of its programme, the committee is going to visit certain identified schools in the district.
	
	In assessing the impact of the adjusted level 3 lockdown regulations on the reopening of schools, the committee will pay a close attention on areas that include, adherence to health protocols, procurement of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), plans to cover 2021 curriculum given the delayed 2021 academic year, infrastructure that includes maintenance, safety security, availability of water and sanitation, processes for screening, testing and tracing, scholar transport, plans to initiate the school nutrition programme and assessment of the plans to distribute Learner Teacher Support Materials to schools.
	
	The morning session will be dedicated to an interaction with stakeholders at Maluti college. The stakeholder that the committee will interact with include the Eastern Cape Provincial Department of Education including the Offices of the MEC, associations of school governing bodies, organized labour, and SA Principals Association. In the Afternoon the committee will visit schools in the Matatiele Education District.
	
	Details of the visit
	Date: Thursday, 04 February 2021
	Time: 09:00
	Venue: Maluti college
	
	The full oversight programme can be downloaded here: https://tinyurl.com/yydj6mu9
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga