Parliament, Tuesday, 13 July 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation has acknowledged a general improvement in governance at water boards as evidenced by the positive audit outcomes for Umgeni Water, Magalies Water and Rand Water.
	
	The committee this morning received a briefing from the three water boards on their 2019/20 annual reports. The committee welcomed the information that Magalies Water received a clean audit, which was a commitment made to the committee by the board and senior management. Similarly, the achievement of unqualified audit opinions by Umgeni and Rand Water creates a favourable platform for the achievement of the constitutional right for access to water for all.
	
	“Both the department and the Portfolio Committee committed themselves following the release of the previous financial year to strengthening oversight over the water boards to ensure good governance, which is a bedrock for delivery of quality services. We are pleased to see the results of this commitment,” said Ms Machwene Semenya, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	MAGALIES WATER RAND WATER UMGENI WATER  DEFAULTERS The committee remains concerned about the perpetual risk factor caused by defaulting municipalities and non-payment of services to the water boards. While the committee acknowledges the work done by government to resolve this matter, it remains concerned by the impact of the lack of finality has on the water boards, including negative impact on working capital of the water boards, risk of credit downgrades, risk to implementing Capex programmes and the inability to maintain already existing infrastructure. The committee has called for the Cabinet to move with speed to find solutions to this perennial challenge. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HUMAN SETTLEMENTS, WATER AND SANITATION, MS MACHWENE SEMENYA. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The annual Budget determines how much money government departments will receive and has to be approved by Parliament. Inkatha Freedom Party on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal