Parliament, Wednesday, 07 July 2021 - The Presiding Officers of Parliament, led by Speaker of the National Assembly Ms Thandi Modise and Chairperson of the NCOP Mr Amos Masondo, join the nation in mourning the passing of African National Congress liberation struggle veteran and former Member of Parliament, Ms Rosalia Masefele Storey Morutoa.
	
	Ms Morutoa, affectionately known as ‘Ma Storey’, became a Member of Parliament in 2000 and served in the Portfolio Committee on Communication, Arts and Culture, Ethics and Members Interest. She was the Chairperson of the Joint Multi-Party Women's Caucus from 2014 to 2019.
	
	Ms Morutoa dedicated her life to fighting for the freedom and justice that we have today. An outspoken advocate for women's rights and gender equality, she was amongst the brave and courageous women freedom fighters who joined the African National Congress and operated in its underground structures in 1960s. As a champion of the rights of women and children, she devoted her time, energies and sharp political acumen to fighting all structural inhibitions that frustrated gender parity. In the 1980s, she served as the executive member of the Federation of South African Women and the ANC Women’s league.
	
	“Through her vast knowledge, wisdom and political experience, MaStorey made immense contribution to the strengthening of the oversight programme of Parliament, especially in relation to the adoption of a more focused oversight approach in sector parliaments for women and youth”, said the Presiding Officers.
	
	“She was a natural nurturer, a stern disciplinarian, a selfless leader and a voice for the voiceless; she always put the needs of women and rights of children first. Indeed, we mourn her passing but take comfort in that the legacy of her fight for women emancipation will endure through the many lives she touched” added the Presiding Officers.
	
	Parliament extends heartfelt condolences to her family, friends and her political home, the African National Congress.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape