Parliament, Thursday, 8 July 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities, and the Select Committee on Health and Social Services today held a joint meeting to consider and adopt the report on the filling of vacancies in the National Youth Development Agency (NYDA).
	
	The committees had received a report from the State Security Agency (SSA) on some of the recommended candidates, however, there were three candidates who received negative findings from the screenings. For some of the recommended candidates there were still outstanding SSA reports and this threw a curveball to the adoption of the report of the subcommittee of the committees.
	
	The committees were advised by legal services that the requirements prescribed by the National Youth Development Agency Act, 2008, section 10 of the Act disqualifies a person for appointment on the following grounds: an unrehabilitated insolvent, one who has been convicted and imprisoned without the option of a fine, or fined more than the prescribed amount, for theft, forgery, perjury and offence in connection with the promotion, formation or management of a company, any violation of the Public Finance Management Act of any offence involving dishonesty, has as a result of improper conduct been removed from an office of trust; or has been declared by a court to be mentally ill or unfit.
	
	The committees have resolved to have a closed meeting with the three candidates to provide them with an opportunity to present their reasons behind the negative findings. The committees further resolved to wait for the report from the SSA on the outstanding candidates before they adopt the report and send it to the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces.
	
	The committees have also noted the Human Resources report where the qualifications of all the shortlisted candidates have been verified. They will convene next week to finalise and adopt the report.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON WOMEN, YOUTH AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, MS NONHLANHLA NCUBE-NDABA AND THE SELECT COMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES, MS MAURENCIA GILLION
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Service
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Northern Cape