Parliament, Saturday, 10 July 2021 – The Presiding Officers of Parliament, led by the Speaker of the National Assembly Ms Thandi Modise and the Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces Mr Amos Masondo, are deeply saddened by the passing on of the Executive Mayor of the City of Joburg Mr Geoff Makhubo, due to Covid-19 related diseases.
	
	Mr Makhubo, a seasoned public representative in the local government sphere of government, served the City of Joburg diligently over the years in various capacities. He fully understood the magnitude of the task and responsibility of leading the economic hub of South Africa, having presided over the city's finances as a Member of the Mayoral Committee for Finance, as leader of the opposition in council, and ultimately as the Executive Mayor.
	
	“He was a great asset in local government matters, the coalface of service delivery, and brought in unique experience and know-how particularly during cooperative government and intergovernmental relations programmes led by the National Council of Provinces. His clarity, analysis and approach always demonstrated a well-versed and passionate public representative concerned with solutions to the socio-economic challenges faced by all citizens of the city. In him, we have lost an industrious and unpretentious public servant”, said the Presiding Officers.
	
	“He truly understood servanthood leadership and led from the front in the fight against the pandemic since its outbreak last year. Despite being hospitalised, Mayor Makhubo was more concerned about the welfare of the people he led; he continued to urge the public to adhere to all health and safety protocols from his bedside. He was a brave and exemplary leader and did not put the interests of his health above those of others. Against this volatile and tricky pandemic, he died on the battlefield with his boots on. The people of Joburg and South Africa owe it to him and thousands of others who lost the battle against this disease to intensify the unity of purpose to dislodge its grip”, said the Presiding officers.
	
	We extend our heartfelt condolences to Makhubo family, friends and colleagues and pay homage to his legacy of selflessness as a public representative.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape