Parliament, Sunday, 11 July 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, is saddened and shocked by the untimely passing of the Deputy Commissioner of Police: Crime Detection, Lieutenant General Sindile Mfazi.
	
	“The silent killer that is Covid-19 has robbed the South African Police Service (SAPS) in particular and the country in general of a dedicated and astute police officer who was always concerned with ensuring the safety and security of the people of this country. The police fraternity is poorer today as a result of the inevitability of death,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson lamented.
	
	Lieutenant-General Mfazi has since the inception of the 6th Parliament been an epitome of the excellence that is envisioned by the National Development Plan (NDP) in building a capable, developmental, professional and responsive state. Despite the challenges within the SAPS and its efforts to fight crime, Lieutenant-General Mfazi’s commitment to the fight against gender based violence and femicide (GBVF) never waned.
	
	“The interactions the committee had with Lieutenant-General Mfazi while he occupied various positions were characterised by honesty, robustness and an appreciation of the importance of oversight in the work of the SAPS. We will miss these interactions especially his insight on strategies to fight the worrying scourge of GBV and crime in South Africa,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson emphasised.
	
	Ms Joemat-Pettersson extended the committee’s heartfelt condolences to the Mfazi family, SAPS, his colleagues and everybody that Lieutenant-General Mfazi’s lifelong work has touched. “May his family be consoled by the knowledge that his was a life dedicated to ensuring safety of the people of South Africa and that he ran that race competently,” Ms Joemat-Pettersson added.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairpersons, please contact the committees’ Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Free State