Parliament, Friday, 2 July 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Mineral Resources and Energy, Mr Sahlulele Luzipo, is saddened to learn of the untimely passing of the board chairperson of Mintek, Dr Vanguard Mkhosana. Mr Luzipo has extended, with outmost sincerity, his heartfelt condolences to the family, friends and colleagues of Dr Mkhosana.
	
	Dr Mkhosana was appointed to serve a three-year term as Mintek board chairperson by the Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy, starting from 1 June 2020. He contributed to the entity his vast knowledge on matters related to corporate governance, such as strategy, organisational performance, risk control and organisational sustainability.
	
	His untimely passing has robed the country of a man of great stature and sound leadership acumen. Throughout his career, Dr Mkhosana served as member and chairperson of boards in both public and private companies, including, among others, the Eastern Cape Rural Development Agency, Human Capital Group (Pty) Ltd, Mayibuye Transport Corporation (MTC), and Zizi-Consulting (Pty) Ltd. He is also the former Director-General of the Department of Employment and Labour.
	
	“Dr Mkhosana demonstrated a commitment to Mintek’s principles of integrity, accountability and openness each time he led the entity to appear before the committee. He was also passionate about transformation, and he was aiming for at least 46% women representation during his tenure as board chairperson,” said Mr Luzipo.
	
	In conclusion, Mr Luzipo has once again expressed his heartfelt condolences to the family, friends and colleagues, and he wished for the soul of Dr Mkhosana to rest in peace.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON MINERAL RESOURCES AND ENERGY, MR SAHLULELE LUZIPO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mr Justice Molafo
	Tel: 021 403 8444
	Cell: 081 424 7481
	Email: jmolafo@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape