Parliament, Wednesday, 26 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Police has called on the South African Police Service (Saps) and the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) to integrate their responses to questions posed by the committee on discipline management and the processing of cases against police officers.
	
	Saps and Ipid management appeared before the committee today to brief the committee on Saps’ discipline management, as well as issues of police discipline and Ipid’s charges against police officers.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson, told Saps and Ipid that their presentations contradicted one another on very serious matters, including statistics on police officers’ assault, rape, torture and display of firearms cases. Ms Joemat-Pettersson said: “Your presentations do not talk to each other, and that diminishes the objective of this session to assess progress on your work regarding application of consequences for perpetrators of misconduct and crime.”
	
	The committee expressed its unhappiness about the ineffectiveness of the work of both institutions on matters of police discipline. It told Saps and Ipid that at the core of the problem is a lack of consequence management following Ipid’s recommendations to Saps. The committee said for that in the past three years only lip service has been paid to the application of consequences for misconduct and crimes.
	
	The Saps National Commissioner and the Ipid executive director assured the committee of their commitment to cooperation, saying they will have regular meetings. Ipid requested that Saps extend an invitation to them when police discipline cases are heard, to close any gaps in cases.
	
	The Deputy Mister of Police, Mr Cassel Mathale, also assured the committee of closer cooperation between Ipid and Saps. “The entities were created purely to complement each other, not for something else.” General Sitole apologised to the committee for their failure to consolidate their presentations. He also promised that a dedicated team will be put in place to integrate the work of both entities.
	
	The committee will call Saps and Ipid to appear before it again to hear the consolidated presentation. “We don’t want written responses, as we normally do when we are unhappy about responses that are given. We are going to put aside enough time for the two entities to present a single presentation to us and then we interact on these matters of discipline,” said Ms Joemat-Pettersson. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MS TINA JOEMAT-PETTERSSON. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za   Democracy is not an event that occurred in 1994. It is a process to which all of us can contribute by making our voices heard in Parliament, in the provincial legislatures and in broader society. Freedom Front Plus on the provincial list for the province of Free State