Parliament, Thursday, 13 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Health will from tomorrow visit public health facilities in the Northern Cape that are going to roll-out the Phase 2 Covid-19 vaccination programme to communities in the province.
	
	The committee resolved to visit all the provinces to assess their state of readiness to roll-out the Phase 2 vaccination programme that will include the elderly and people with comorbidities from 17 May 2021.
	
	“The aim of the visit is to assess the state of preparedness of the facilities to receive, secure and properly store the vaccines, as well as policies for proper disposal of vaccine vials. Also important, is to assess the transportation plans for the vaccines especially to rural areas in a vast province such as Northern Cape. It is important that we do this assessment particularly with the anticipated start of the phase 2 of the vaccination roll out,” said Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, the Chairperson of the committee.
	
	The committee is empowered by Section 55 (2) of the Constitution to have oversight over the executive and as a result have held numerous engagements with the Department of Health on South Africa’s response to the Covid-19 pandemic.
	
	On the 6th of March 2020, following its visit to the Health Port Facility at the OR Tambo international Airport, the committee made a commitment to strengthen its oversight over the department as it implements measures to fight the spread of Covid-19. Tomorrow’s visit forms part of the realisation of that commitment.
	
	The committee is cognisant that the fight against the spread of Covid-19 will only be intensified by the effective roll-out of vaccines that will eventually ensure herd immunity. Also, the availability of a clear rollout plan of up to a point of vaccination and also taking into consideration of different provincial permutations is necessary. These visits will ensure that those plans are in place and Phase 2 is ready for rollout.
	
	Details of the visit;
	Date: Friday, 14 May 2021
	Venue: Seoding Clinic, Kuruman
	Time: 12:00
	
	Second Site
	Date: Friday, 14 May 2021
	Venue: Medical Depot, Kimberley
	Time: 16:00
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za The Bill of Rights guarantees the right to assemble, demonstrate, picket and present petitions as long as this is done in a peaceful way and the protesters are unarmed. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal