Parliament, Thursday, 27 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs has urged the Government Printing Works (GPW) executive management and labour to earnestly work towards improving their working relationship to ensure a conducive work environment.
	
	Following a successful one-day oversight visit to the entity in Pretoria in which there was extensive engagement between labour representatives and management, the committee believes normalising work relationships will improve levels of trust and ensure a constructive work environment characterised by constant and critical engagement.
	
	The committee believes that the GPW plays a critical dual strategic role of ensuring South Africa has quality, secure printing as well as economic growth through its potential to increase business on the African continent. “The protection of the work of the entity is essential, not only for the employees but also for the country. It is on this basis that we believe that both parties should dedicate more energy towards resolving some of the internal challenges that exist,” said Mr Mosa Chabane, the leader of delegation.
	
	As for operations at the GPW, the committee is impressed with its seamless processes and high level of security. Despite this, the committee raised a few concerns with the warehouse’s air-conditioning system, which is impacting on employees and the GPW’s valuable machines. The committee urged the GPW to amplify their engagements with the Department of Public Works and Infrastructure to expedite the overhaul of the entire system to meet operational requirements. The committee also highlighted the need for employees to have protective equipment, especially those working in an extremely controlled cold environment to safeguard the health of the workers.
	
	Regarding human resources in the IT environment, the committee urged GPW to develop a strategy to augment skills and capacity, to ensure sustainability in the long run. The committee also recommended a comprehensive investigation into the loss of data and system crash, which hampered production, to prevent a similar event in the future.
	
	As for the various allegations made by both sides, the committee resolved that both parties will submit supporting evidence to enable the committee to make an informed decision. However, the committee is steadfast in its conviction that effective consequence management must be implemented against anyone who commits acts of malfeasance. The committee will deliberate on the GPW matter once it receives all requested information from both labour and management.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS, MR MOSA CHABANE.For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the Committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Malatswa Molepo (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8438
	Cell: 081 512 7920
	E-mail: mmolepo@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal