Parliament, Wednesday 5 May 2021 – President Cyril Ramaphosa will appear in the National Assembly (NA) hybrid plenary sitting tomorrow to provide oral replies to questions from Members of the House, while the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) will convene a virtual Ministerial Briefing on Transport under the theme: “Mitigating the Impact of the Covid-19 Pandemic on the Transport Industry’’
	
	Oral question sessions with the President are scheduled at least once a quarter during session time within Parliament’s annual programme. Questions for Oral Reply sessions are one of the mechanisms Parliament uses in order to hold the Executive to account - as stipulated in Section 92(2) of the Constitution that Cabinet Members are accountable collectively and individually to Parliament for the exercise of powers and performance of their functions.
	
	For the full list of questions to the President, please click:
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/17d4fb09-3770-4425-b461-6cd81e82980d.pdf
	
	Details of the hybrid NA plenary are as follows:
	
	Date: Thursday, 6 May 2021Time: 14:00
	Venue: NA Chamber and Virtual platforms
	
	The NA tomorrow morning at 08.30 will convene its virtual Programming Committee meeting to consider this term’s programme, reports of committees, and Bills before the House.
	
	Meanwhile, Permanent Delegates to the NCOP will be briefed by the Minister of Transport Mr Fikile Mbalula tomorrow at 14.00.
	
	Details of the NCOP Virtual sittings are as follows:
	
	Dates: Thursday 6 May 2021
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	
	Important to note:
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NA Hybrid Sitting should send their details (Full name, name of the media house, and ID or passport number) to Mlindi Mpindi on email: mmpindi@parlaiment.gov.za.
	
	Members of the media who wish to observe the NA Programme Committee Meeting and/or the NCOP virtual Ministerial Briefing should forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on: mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliament Communications Service WhatsApp group, where login details will be shared. Journalists must forward their requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow the proceedings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via the live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel, Facebook and Twitter pages. Please see links below.
	You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape