Parliament, Tuesday, 4 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (Cogta) will tomorrow hold an engagement with Ngaka Modiri Molema District and its four local municipalities. Thereafter, the committee with hold stakeholder engagements with the Local Houses of Traditional Leaders, other traditional leaders, ward committees, religious structures and the business sector, amongst others.
	
	Details of tomorrow’s programme are as follows:
	Date: Wednesday, 5 May 2021
	Venue: North West Provincial Legislature Auditorium
	Time: 09h00 – 15h30
	
	The committee invites all interested individuals and organisations to attend and make presentations to them on the quality of services received and challenges faced with the municipality at the stakeholder engagement session from 16h00 to 17h30. All presentations or submissions can be forwarded to the Committee Secretary via email to scassiem@parliament.gov.za.
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng