Parliament, Saturday, 22 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Health heard from the Langa Clinic management today that the clinic’s vaccination rollout plans are with the Western Cape’s Department of Health as the clinic is one of the City of Cape Town’s healthcare sites for the rollout of Phase 2 of the vaccination programme to the people.
	
	In welcoming the briefing from the clinic, the committee commended the clinic leadership for presenting plans to the department on how it is going to assist in the rollout of the vaccination programme.
	
	At Guguletu Township’s KTC Clinic, the committee established that the roll-out of the programme was underway and the people over the age of 60 were in a queue waiting for vaccination. Despite the rollout of the programme, the clinic management told the committee about infrastructure challenges that included limited space that the clinic is experiencing.
	
	At Newman Community Day Centre in Paarl, the committee was informed that the site is not ready for the rollout of the programme. Its management informed the committee that it is going to be ready at the end of May to rollout the programme. The managers attributed the delay to the change of vaccines from Johnson & Johansson to Pfizer.
	
	Committee Chairperson, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo told leaders and managers at all the healthcare centres that the objective of the oversight is to assess the readiness of the healthcare centres for the rollout of Phase 2 of the vaccination programme. The Western Cape is the second province that the committee has conducted an oversight following a visit to the Northern Cape.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, DR SIBONGISENI DHLOMO.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za Bills can only be introduced in Parliament by Ministers, Deputy Ministers, parliamentary committees and individual MPs. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of North West