Parliament, Friday, 21 May 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Basic Education, Ms Bongiwe Mbinqo-Gigaba, has expressed outrage at the recent incident of bullying at a school in Cape Town where a Grade 8 boy was caught on camera setting alight the hair of a fellow Grade 8 girl.
	
	The incident, which circulated on social media, was confirmed to have happened earlier this week at Belgravia High School in Athlone, Cape Town. The video showed a girl sitting in class being taunted by a boy who poured liquid on her head. He then set her hair alight. The class is heard laughing at the incident. The teacher appeared to have stepped out of the class.
	
	Ms Mbinqo-Gigaba said she is outraged by yet another bullying video, especially since schools should have an anti-bullying policies. All learners should be familiar with these policies and the consequences if they do not adhere to them. “The bullying behaviour of this boy has also put the life of this learner, as well as that of other learners, in danger by setting the girl’s hair alight. I cannot but condemned the incident, as the events could have spiralled out of control very quickly.
	
	“Furthermore, we have last month experience the horrific effects of bullying when a Limpopo learner committed suicide after videos of her being smacked around by fellow Grade 10 girls were shared on social media. Policies should be enforced. If there are still schools operating without a code of conduct or an anti-bullying policy, they should urgently address this matter.”
	
	The Western Cape Education Department has confirmed that the learner was suspended on Monday after the video became public. Ms Mbinqo said: “I sometimes ask myself: is it enough to suspend a learner until the outcome of a disciplinary process? Maybe we should relook at the consequences. Maybe it should include community service in order for the learner to fully understand his actions and the trauma that he caused.”
	
	“I would further urge education authorities across the country to ensure that those involved in bullying are made to face the consequences of their actions and to stamp it out. Education is a societal issue. Therefore, the responsibility for the safety of learners does not just lie with the education authorities, but with everyone. I want to urge parents and caregivers to also take up this responsibility to make learners aware of bullying and its devastating consequences. The committee is planning an oversight visit to schools in the province in the near future and it is definitely an issue we will take up.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON BASIC EDUCATION, MS BONGIWE MBINQO-GIGABA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo