Presenting his ministry’s R96 billion budget vote before a mini plenary of the National Assembly recently, the Minister of Police, Mr Bheki Cele, lamented the killing of police, an act he equated with killing the state. If he had his way, those found guilty of such an act would rot in jail, never to see the light of the day. Nonetheless, the South African Police Service (SAPS) has learnt some valuable lessons from the outbreak of Covid-19 and the police have served throughout the pandemic, against all odds. The minister focussed first on budget cuts which will affect visible policing a great deal. The budget was cut by 35% and much of the remainder will go on compensation. In the face of this, the department will seek to ensure that more is allocated to implementation than consumption. To this end, the department will in this financial year spend 51% on visible policing in line with recommendations of the High Level Panel’s report on the Marikana incident. The department will also improve the quality of its public order policing mandate. To ensure that there’s successful prosecution of cases brought to courts, the department will spend 20% on detective work. Apart from that, he said the department in on an aggressive recruitment drive to supplement the police force to meet its increasing visible policing needs and to increase the police ratio per the South African population. The Minister welcomed the R1.2 billion allocation to fight gender-based violence (GBV). Family centres for victims are an ideal response in the fight against GBV, in his view. However, the harsh sentencing of perpetrators will also assist. The six life sentences meted to a Zimbabwe national based in the Eastern Cape for killing his wife and children is a case in point. R100 million of this year’s budget will be distributed to provinces to support their fight against GBV. In addition, the department has established a civilian secretariat to monitor, evaluate and assist in improving the police’s action and response to GBV cases. Supporting the police’s budget vote, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Police, Ms Tina Joemat-Pettersson welcomed the department’s strategies to ensure that “our country is free of crime, corruption and GBV. Wherein we respect and enforce laws and human rights for all”. For this to be achieved, she said: “We need to amend the 1995 Police Act to ensure it reflects the aspiration of our constitution. We need to fully review and amend this act to ensure that it’s in line with our constitution.” It is expected that the Bill will come before Parliament towards the end of this year. “We urge the public to participate in its debate to ensure that we get it right. We don’t have an option to fail.” Turning to the topical issue of firearm ownership, Ms Joemat-Pettersson said the firearm act also needs to be amended to deal with the firearm registry “to reduce acts of violent crime emanating from stolen fire arms”. She maintained that firearm owners must know that “gun ownership is not fundamental right, by a privilege governed by law”. Lambasting the cut in the police budget, Mr Andrew Whitfield of the National Assembly (NA), claimed that criminals are celebrating the defunding of the policing budget. “We projected that the police needed R108 billion to meet their elastic targets, but the police received R96 billion, instead. Mr Whitfield noted that the cuts come at a time when VIP protection budget increased by R103 million, to R530 million in this financial year. His estimates place this budget at R1.7billion in later years. The police budget is designed to protect the elite, he stated. Another Member of the NA, Mr Henry Shembeni agreed wholeheartedly with this point. “In Cape Town, a parallel criminal state is on the rise. People are required to pay criminals protection fees in order to run their businesses.” This and the recent mass killings in Khayelitsha go to show that “the Police Gang Unit is resourcing criminals and the underworld. It enables crime in Cape Town.” He further alleged: “Minister, you don’t know what is to be done; this is a fight you have long lost.” On GBV, he claimed “many cases go unreported because there are few prosecutions of reported cases. People have lost confidence in police.” Abel Mputing 24 May 2021 MPs have freedom of speech in Parliament, as long as they keep within the parliamentary rules. They cannot be prosecuted, arrested, imprisoned or be expected to pay damages for anything they say, produce or submit in Parliament or its committees. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng