Parliament, Monday 24 May 2021 – The two Houses of Parliament, the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) and the National Assembly (NA), will tomorrow, Tuesday 25 May, hold virtual plenary sittings.
	
	The NA will commence the day with a Rules Committee meeting scheduled at 08:30. NA Speaker Thandi Modise is expected to communicate her decision on a proposal brought by United Democratic Movement leader Mr Bantu Holomisa, that Section 194 Committee - which will inquire into whether or not there are grounds for the removal from office of Public Protector Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane, should use a weighted voting system.
	
	In a weighted voting system, each political party in a Section 194 committee will have a weighted vote determined by the percentage of the electorate they represent.
	
	The meeting will be followed by two (2) mini-plenaries which will cover six (6) budget votes- Vote 10: Public Enterprises; Vote 13: Public Works and Infrastructure; Vote 19: Social Development; Vote 25: Justice and Constitutional Development; Vote 41: Water and Sanitation and Vote 36: Small Business Development.
	
	Meanwhile, the NCOP will hold policy debates on budget vote 32: Forestry, Fisheries and Environment and budget vote 5: Home Affairs.
	
	A virtual lecture on Africa day will follow the policy debates under the theme: “Pioneering Africa's Inclusive Recovery and Free Trade: Levers for Building the Africa we want". Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry, Mr Fikile Majola and Professor Vusi Gumede, Dean of Faculty of Economic Development and Business, University of Mpumalanga, will deliver a keynote address focusing on the African free trade area agreement.
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA VIRTUAL PLENARY:
	Date: Tuesday, 25 May 2021
	Time: 10.00 Vote 10: Public Enterprises,
	Vote 13: Public Works and Infrastructure,
	Vote 19: Social Development
	
	 14:00 Vote 25: Justice and Constitutional Development,
	Vote 41: Water and Sanitation,
	Vote 36: Small Business Development
	Venue: Virtual Platform
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL PLENARY SITTING: 
	Date: Tuesday, 25 May 2021
	Time: 10.00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	DETAILS OF THE AFRICA DAY LECTURE:
	Date: Tuesday, 25 May 2021
	Time: 15.00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The room in which a House meets to debate is called a “Chamber”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga