Parliament, Friday, 28 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour has noted with concerns the audit opinions of the Compensation Fund (CF) and the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF).
	
	The Auditor-General’s (AG’s) office briefed the committee on the 2019/20 financial year where both entities achieved qualified audit opinions.
	
	The entities were audited in three areas, the financial statements, performance information, and compliance with the requisite legislation.
	
	The AG informed the committee that there have not been improvements in audit outcomes of a disclaimer for eight years at the Compensation Fund, with an exception of the 2010,11 and 2011/12 financial years, which were adverse opinions.
	
	However, the situation was better at the UIF in the last two financial years. The AG indicated that financial statements were submitted late and contained errors that could not be corrected.
	
	The AG also highlighted the failure to effect consequence management. The AG recommended that both entities provide regular updates to the committee on action plans and progress of disciplinary cases.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa, said the committee needed to confront the situation. “The committee will consider inviting the department and both entities hopefully before Parliament rises. This situation is dire and ought to be confronted head-on.”
	
	She said there need not be a compromise on officials who fail to do what they are employed for. “Consequence management should follow naturally where there have been transgressions and reported instances of irregular, wasteful and fruitless expenditure.”
	
	The committee heard that both entities were prone to poor record keeping that could not be relied upon, resulting in poor evidence for performance achieved. “We are concerned and we need to rescue the situation. The two entities are at the core of delivery in the portfolio and support the country’s needy people. If this is a challenge of skills, it ought to be resolved.”
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY SERVICES ON BEHALAF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON EMPLOYMENT AND LABOUR, MS LINDELWA DUNJWA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. Democratic Alliance on the provincial list for the province of Western Cape