Parliament, Sunday, 30 May 2021 – The Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development, Mr Mondli Gungubele, said no input will be ignored during the provincial public hearings on the Children’s Amendment Bill which the committee will kick-start on Sunday (6 June) in Limpopo.
	
	Mr Gungubele said: “The committee is excited and looking forward to interacting with our people about the welfare of our children. This is a demonstration that our people, especially children, as a vulnerable group are at the centre of our democracy.”
	
	He calls on South Africans in the provinces to take the opportunity presented to them, to express their opinions on the Bill. Furthermore, he said, to fulfil their constitutional role of direct participation in a legislative process that will deliver a legislation which will improve the welfare of the South African children.
	
	The Children’s Amendment Bill is intended to, among others, resolve challenges relating to the foster care grant payments, resolve parental responsibilities among unmarried parents, child marriages, and resolve challenges related to children born to foreign parents and unaccompanied migrant children.
	
	Mr Gungubele said the Bill is about the future of children who in turn are the future of the country. “It is exciting that even the Minister of the Department of Social Development, Ms Lindiwe Zulu, has committed herself to be part of some of the public hearings programme. No community will be left behind, and no input will be deemed insignificant in trying to realise the welfare of our children,” he added.
	
	Limpopo programme
	
	District: Vhembe
	Date: Sunday, 6 June 2021
	Venue: Makwarela Community Hall (Thulamela)
	Time: 10h00
	
	District: Mopani
	Date: Monday, 7 June 2021
	Venue: Lenyenye Community Hall (Greater Tzaneen)
	Time: 10h00
	
	District: Capricorn
	Date: Tuesday, 8 June 2021
	Venue: Jakes Botes Hall (Polokwane)
	Time: 10h00
	
	District: Sekhukhune
	Date: Wednesday, 9 June 2021
	Venue: Moses Mabotha Civic Hall (Makhuduthamaga)
	Time: 10h00
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY SERVICES ON BEHALAF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT, MR MONDLI GUNGUBELE.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sibongile Maputi (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 052 6060
	E-mail: smaputi@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Mpumalanga