The Social Development Department presented its R2.663 billion budget vote today before a National Assembly’s (NA’s) mini-plenary. This vote took place against escalating poverty levels, income and economic deprivation that are products of a contacting economy and the economic demands imposed on its budget by Covid-19. One of the priorities of the department, said the Minister of Social Development, Ms Lindiwe Zulu, is to stop the cycle of poverty through its district development strategy, which is in line with the United Nations’ objective of reducing levels of hunger and improve social development and to establish an integrated approach to the monitoring and evaluation of social development imperatives. It is hoped, she said, that the district-centred approach to social development, which include the public and private sector, civil society and academics, will improve the department’s policy directives and implementation of its programmes. She made it abundantly clear that she fully supports the inception of the basic Income grant. She said: “This grant is going to play an important role in reducing higher levels of poverty. There is a lot of discussion in this regard and it is a matter that is receiving urgent consideration. Coupled with this is a discussion document that seeks to create a broad consultation of key role players to determine how the financing of this grant between the ages of 19 to 59 years.” On gender-based violence and femicide (GBVF), she admitted that her department is central to this cause. But she said It’s a fight that should involve all individuals, and that must be fought from street to street, and community to community, if we were to curb its surge. She also welcomed the Bill on GBV which in her view will address the lack of legislation on this matter. She said this Bill seeks to address that. Regarding the youth, she said her department will utilise a portion of the budget to ensure that young graduates are absorbed by other departments and into the mainstream economy and labour market. The department has several initiatives in the offing to enhance its strategic position. Among other things, it’s currently considering a Green Paper on security reforms, as well as the implementation of its new registry on delivery which is meant to ensure that the statistical spending on the department’s programmes and its policy making are accessible and transparent. In its 2021 budget vote, the department also prioritised the non-profit organisations (NPOs) that are at the coalface of social development. This social arm of the department will receive R300 million and a further R7 million will be distributed to provinces. She warned though that “we need value for money for these budget allocations. They must be seen to be servicing the needs of the poor and the victims of the GBVF, in our bid to build resilient communities”. Speaking in the same mini-plenary, the Chairperson of the Portfolio Committee on Social Development, Mr Mondli Gungubele, stated that the success of the department’s mandate can be fortified by the inception of a theory of change to support its policy directives. He welcomed the R2 billion earmarked for the department which will, among others things, extend the R350 Covid-19 grant which will have a positive impact on the lives of many people in distress. He called for a coordinated effort between the early childhood development initiatives and the National Development Agency to address food security. Like many parliamentarians, he is concerned about the budget cut experienced by the department. “We need to investigate as a committee whether these cuts won’t affect the work of NPOs. And when will those NPOs that have not been paid be paid their funds? This has to be looked at because NPOs provide a vital service to the state,” he said. He further called on the department to pay attention to the Auditor-General’s (AG’s) report to stem finical mismanagement and performance deficiencies of the department which were flagged by the AG’s report. Members of the NA called for the realignment of the objectives of the department. Ms Bridget Masango suggested that there’s a need to speed up the process of signing the Social Assistance Amendment Bill into law. She said: “To bring about a solution to social care crisis in the country.” She lamented the downward adjustment of the budget by the National Treasury. Illustrating the catastrophe of hunger and want in the country, Ms Laetitia Arries stated that the impending march on 28 May against hunger is an illustration of the frustration people have against failed government policies to address poverty and hunger. “Instead of being eradicated, poverty has been made to be a permanent feature of our society, and 14 million people go to bed without food. And there is seemingly no plan to bring this catastrophe to an end,” she emphasised. She said the government was also blamed for its pushback against its own policies. “You agreed that well over 5 000 unemployed, qualified social workers will be absorbed in the social development stream to assist in alleviating the backlog in realising some of the social development objectives,” she said. By Abel Mputing 25 May 2021 Parliament and its committees have the right to ask any institution or person to report to them and may summons any person to appear before them. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo