Parliament, Friday, 14 May 2021 – The Portfolio on Justice and Correctional Services has told the commissioners and managers of the Human Rights Commission (HRC) to make the targets of the commission in its annual performance plan clear to ensure, among other things, that they are achievable, trackable and monitorable. In welcoming the commission’s presentation, the Chairperson of the committee, Mr Bulelani Magwanishe, said the targets presented today were bit broad. “Your targets are very broad; please always ensure that your targets are clearly focused. Your targets must meet the principles of smart targets.” The HRC appeared before the committee today to present its annual performance plan (APP) and budget for the 2021/22 financial year. The committee expressed its dissatisfaction with the HRC’s failure to implement the 81% of the audit recommendations it had resolved to implement. The HRC only met 59%. The committee wanted assurance from the commission about plans to implement the remainder of the recommendations. The committee congratulated the HRC’s innovative ways of carrying on with its programmes on a very limited budget. Mr Magwanishe said: “Its is encouraging to note that you respond innovatively on the overstretched national fiscus and economy. Please continue to work creatively with what you have and ensure that programmes are funded.” The committee called on the commission to implement smart principles to monitor its targets effectively and efficiently. On the interviews for the position of the Deputy Commission, Mr Magwanishe informed the commission that the committee has concluded the interviews and will submit the recommended candidate to the National Assembly for adoption. Mr Magwansihe welcomed the appointment of the new commission’s Chief Financial Officer. He also passed condolences to the commission on the passing away of one of its members. The committee also deliberated on the Traditional Courts Amendment Bill and established its constitutionality. Mr Magwanishe said the National Assembly must only pass a Bill when it is certain about its constitutionality. He said: “We can’t afford the House to send a Bill that it is uncertain about and send it to the President for assent.” The Department of Justice and Constitutional Development’s Deputy Minister Mr John Jeffrey assured the committee that the department has consulted with the National House of Traditional Leaders and that traditional leaders have made inputs on the Bill. After these assurances, the committee agreed, with the exception of committee Members from the Democratic Alliance, to take the Bill to an outside senior legal counsel to establish its constitutionality. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON JUSTICE AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES, MR BULELANI MAGWANISHE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer: Name: Mava Lukani (Mr)
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Cell: 081 503n 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za  Although ordinary citizens may not submit bills to Parliament, they may lobby MPs or committees to introduce legislation that deals with their concerns. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of North West