Parliament, Wednesday 19 May 2021 – The two Houses of Parliament, the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) and the National Assembly (NA), will tomorrow, Thursday 20 May, hold virtual plenary sittings.
	
	The NCOP will hold a policy debate on Budget Vote 34: Mineral Resources and Energy. The sitting will start at 14:00.
	
	Meanwhile, the NA will cover six (6) budget votes in 2 mini plenaries. These are Vote 22: Correctional Services; Vote 28, 24 & 21: Police (includes Independent Police Investigative Directorate and Civilian Secretariat for the Police Service); Vote 6: International Relations and Cooperation; Vote 11, 7 & 12: Public Service and Administration (National School of Government and Public Service Commission); Vote 16: Basic Education and Vote 8: National Treasury
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP VIRTUAL PLENARY SITTING: 
	Date: Thursday, 20 May 2021
	Time: 14:00
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA VIRTUAL PLENARY:
	Date: Thursday, 20 May 2021
	
	Time: 14:00 – 16:15
	Vote 22: Correctional Services
	Vote 28, 24 & 21: Police (includes Independent Police Investigative Directorate
	and Civilian Secretariat for the Police Service)
	Vote 6: International Relations and Cooperation
	
	16:30 – 18:45
	Vote 11, 7 & 12: Public Service and Administration (National School of
	Government and Public Service Commission)
	Vote 16: Basic Education
	Vote 8: National Treasury
	
	Venue: Virtual platform
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng