Parliament, Friday, 14 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration adopted the budget votes of the Department of Public Service and Administration (DPSA), Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME), Statistics South Africa (Stats SA), Public Service Commission (PSC) and the National School of Governance (NSG) yesterday.
	
	The committee noted that Stats SA embarked on a research to assess different funding models due to continuing resource constraints it is currently experiencing. It acknowledges caution from the Statistician-General about nefarious interests that certain donors might pursue, and based on that, Stats SA has no option, but to rely on the National Treasury for funding.
	
	The committee has noted that Stats SA’s planned Census 2021 has been postponed to February 2022 as it clashes with the 2021 local government elections.The committee calls on all South Africansto to participate in the planned census.
	
	The committee has also noted the PSC’s initiative on the legislative reform project which will introduce a Bill that will allow the PSC to be supported by a Secretariat that is independent from the government in order to ensure its independence and impartiality.
	
	The committee commends the government’s swift response to the Covid-19 pandemic and its reprioritisation of programmes and resources towards tackling the pandemic. However, it expressed its concern over the lack of a monitoring tool to monitor the State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) and called upon the department of PSC to act swiftly towards monitoring the SOE.
	
	The committee encouraged the department to ensure that the Local Government Management Improvement Model is effective and efficient in uprooting the core challenges facing the municipalities. It urged the department to document the interventions according to Section 100 of the Constitution, such as the one that took place at the North West Province, as lessons for improvement and to strengthen policies and programmes.
	
	The committee noted the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the attainment of the annual targets by the NSG. The committee heard that the NSG revenue on the Training Trading Account has been severely affected and impacted on programme 2 which fully funds its activities including compensation of employees. Furthermore, the NSG experienced challenges in generating revenue that resulted in the reduction of revenue from R132 million to R75 million and the number of students also dropped from 43 600 to 26 040.
	
	The committee welcomed the new training programme named Etella which is geared towards the enhancement of management acumen and leadership capabilities of the heads of government departments and their entities.
	
	The committee has also welcomed the commitment by government towards the full implementation of the Public Administration Management Act which aims to, among other things, ensure integration and coordination between public service and local government. Also, the committee noted the department’s involvement in leading digital transformation in the public service.
	
	The committee encourages the department to do everything possible to reach an amicable agreement between government and the organised labour on wage negotiations to maintain stability in the public service and administration.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC SERVICE AND ADMINISTRATION, MR TYOTYO JAMES.
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Sureshinee Govender
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 2239
	Cell: 081 704 1109
	E-mail: sugovender@parliament.gov.za The President may attend meetings of the National Assembly and may speak in the Assembly, but he or she does not have a vote. African National Congress