Parliament, Thursday 27 May 2021 – The National Assembly (NA) plenary sitting this afternoon has approved President Cyril Ramaphosa’s proposals about salary increases for judges, magistrates, the Public Protector, Deputy Public Protector and Commissioners of the South African Human Rights Commission effective from 1 April 2020.
	
	President Ramaphosa, in letters dated 13 April 2021, informed the National Assembly Speaker Ms Thandi Modise that he had received annual salary recommendations from the Independent Commission for the Remuneration of Public Office Bearers.
	
	The Commission having considered the fiscal condition of the country, the State’s wage bill, and the impact of the Public Office Bearer’s salary increment on the fiscus and general economic status of the country, which has been negatively affected by the Covid-19 pandemic, recommended a 0% salary increment for the financial year 2020/2021.
	
	Having considered the Commission’s recommendation, the President intended to determine a 0% salary increase for the judges, magistrates, the Public Protector, Deputy Public Protector and Commissioners of the South African Human Rights Commission.
	
	Approval from both Houses of Parliament – the National Council of Provinces and the National Assembly – is required for the proposed remuneration of the judges and magistrates to become effective. A plenary sitting of the National Council of Provinces is yet to decide on the issue. However, the NA alone approves the salaries of the Public Protector, Deputy Public Protector and the Commissioners.
	
	At the same sitting, the NA approved the report of the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services on the amendments to draft regulations made in terms of section 23(1) of the Legal Aid South Africa Act, 2014.
	
	The proposed amendments to the regulations do not result in any significant policy change. The changes include that civil matters with a significant impact on the life of a client are prioritized if a waiting period is applied, confirmation that legal aid is available to persons 60 years and older in maintenance, domestic violence and harassment cases, that the resources of Legal Aid SA will be focused on divorce matters where clients are vulnerable or will suffer substantial injustice and also make provision for an automatic annual increase in the means test threshold by the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
	
	In its report, the Committee noted that the limited and decreasing civil resources of Legal Aid South Africa will be directed to the most vulnerable.
	
	Section 23(2) of the Legal Aid South Africa Act requires that any regulations made must, before publication in the Government Gazette, be tabled in Parliament by the Minister for approval.
	
	The House approved the amendments to the regulations.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 A joint committee of Parliament receives submissions on constitutional matters and has to review the Constitution at least once a year. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Limpopo