Parliament, Sunday 23 May 2021 – Matters scheduled to come up in an intense parliamentary programme this week include the 4th Ordinary Session of the Pan African Parliament, the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) 142nd Assembly, House Sittings of both the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) and National Assembly (NA), a virtual Africa Day Public Lecture and Committee meetings.
	
	The Chairperson of the National Council of Provinces Mr Amos Masondo will tomorrow lead a Parliamentary delegation to the 4th Ordinary Session of the Pan African Parliament (PAP) in Midrand, Johannesburg. The session planned to take place from 24 May to 4th June is themed: “Arts, Culture and Heritage: Levers for building the Africa we want.” Among others, the session will discuss and present various reports including, the Report by the Permanent Committees on the COVID-19 pandemic in Africa; the activity Report of the PAP; Report of the Ad hoc Committee on the election of the President of the Pan-African Parliament; Committee Meetings and Meeting of the Network of Women Parliamentarians.
	
	Meanwhile, the Speaker of the National Assembly Ms Thandi Modise, will also lead a delegation to the 142nd Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union from 24 -28 May. Items scheduled for discussions, adoption, recommendations include the Adoption of the Special Rules of Procedure for the virtual sessions of the Assembly and Standing Committees; Global overview of the Covid-19 Pandemic; Annual IPU Impact Report by the Secretary-General on the activities of the IPU in 2020; Activities of committees and other bodies and Revision of the IPU strategy.
	
	The NCOP will hold three virtual plenary sittings from Tuesday to Thursday to deal with policy debates of government departments. On Tuesday at 10:00, the policy debate on Budget Vote 32: Forestry, Fisheries and Environment will be held. Wednesday’s sittings at 10:00 will feature Budget Vote 18: Department of Health and Budget Vote 13: Public Works and Infrastructure. At 10:00 on Thursday, Budget Vote 10: Public Enterprises and Budget Vote 40: Department of Transport will be considered.
	
	Also scheduled on Tuesday at 15:00, the NCOP will host a virtual Africa Day Lecture, themed: ‘’Pioneering Africa’s Inclusive Economic Recovery and Free Trade: Levers for Building the Africa We Want”. Professor Vusi Gumede from the University of Mpumalanga and the Deputy Minister of Trade and Industry Mr Fikile Majola will deliver keynote messages.
	
	The National Assembly, on the other hand, will on Tuesday hold three virtual mini plenary sittings and cover six (6) departmental budget votes and these are – Vote 10: Public Enterprises; Vote 13: Public Works and Infrastructure; Vote 19: Social Development; Vote 25: Justice and Constitutional Development; Vote 41: Water and Sanitation and Vote 36: Small Business Development. These will commence from 10:00 to 18:45. On the same day, a virtual Rules Committee is also scheduled from 08:30 – 09:00.
	
	On Wednesday, at its hybrid plenary sitting to start at 15:00, the NA will hold a debate on Africa Day, with the theme: “The year for Arts, Culture and Heritage – Building a better Africa and a better world in the midst of Covid-19.” At the same sitting, a condolences motion for the late Member of Parliament Ms Jacqueline Mofokeng (MP) will be held.
	
	Thursday’s sittings will deal with the consideration of parliamentary committee reports such as the Portfolio Committee on Justice and Correctional Services Report on the Draft Notice determining remuneration, salaries and allowances of the Public Protector, Commissioners of the South African Human Rights Council, Magistrates and Constitutional Court judges. A debate of public interest themed: “Bullying Amongst Learners in Schools” will feature at the same sitting.
	
	Both Houses of Parliament National Assembly and the National Council of provinces will hold a joint hybrid sitting to debate the 25th Anniversary of the Constitution on Friday at 10:00.
	
	About forty (40) Committee meetings of both Houses of Parliament are scheduled this week and are as follows:
	
	MONDAY, 24 MAY 2021 
	
	The Sub-Committee of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities and Select Committee on Health and Social Services on Filling of Vacancies in the NYDA: Consideration and adoption of the criteria for short-listing.
	
	TUESDAY, 25 MAY 2021
	
	The Sub-Committee of the Portfolio Committee on Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities and Select Committee on Health and Social Services on Filling of Vacancies in the NYDA: Shortlisting of candidates.
	
	Standing Committee on Finance: Public Hearings on the Fiscal Responsibility Bill [B5 – 2020].
	
	Portfolio Committee on Home Affairs: Briefing by the Department of Home Affairs, the Department of Communications and Digital Technologies and the State Information Technology Agency (SITA) on the forensic investigation report on Automated Biometric Identification System (ABIS) and how the departments and SITA would salvage the project going forward.
	
	Standing Committee on Appropriations: Briefing by the Department of Correctional Services and Department of Defence on the Appropriation Bill [B4-2021].
	
	Portfolio Committee on Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development: Consideration and adoption of the Committee Report to Presidents’ reservations on the Liquor Products Amendment Bill (B10-2016); Consideration and adoption of the Committee draft outstanding minutes.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Communications: Briefing on the letter from the President of the Republic, requesting the Assembly to consider the draft notice of his determination of the salaries and allowances of councillors of the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa; Roundtable discussion on the impact of digital media in misinformation and content moderation.
	
	Select Committee on Finance: Briefing by National Treasury and Parliamentary Budget Office “A guide to understanding major cryptocurrency issues and a regulatory framework.”
	
	Select Committee on Land Reform, Environment, Mineral Resources and Energy: Negotiating Mandate Meeting on the National Forest Amendment Bill [B11B – 2016] (s76); Consideration and Adoption of Minutes.
	
	Select Committee on Trade and Industry, Economic Development, Small Business Development, Tourism, Employment and Labour: Briefing by the Department of Employment and Labour on the following: International Labour Conference Convention 190: Elimination of Violence and Harassment in the world of work; Budget Vote and Annual Performance Plan of the Department of Employment and Labour; Consideration and Adoption of Minutes and Reports.
	
	WEDNESDAY, 26 MAY 2021 
	
	Select Committee on Petitions and Executive Undertakings: Overseeing and scrutinising the implementation of the executive undertakings made by the Minister of Cooperative and Traditional Affairs (Undertakings made by the President during the sitting of 27 October 2020); Consideration and adoption of the Progress Report on Executive Undertakings made by the Minister of Justice and Correctional Services (during the Question and Answer Session of the NCOP on 27 August 2019).
	
	Select Committee on Appropriations: Consideration of Final Mandates and draft Report on Division of Revenue Bill [B3 -2021]; Consideration of draft Report on hearing on Agriculture conditional grants.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Transport: Deliberations on the Economic Regulation of Transport Bill [B 1-2020]: Briefing by the Department of Transport on its 2020/2021 fourth quarter expenditure.
	
	Standing Committee on Finance: Response by National Treasury to submissions received for the Financial Sector Laws Amendment Bill [B15 – 2020].
	
	Standing Committee on Appropriations: Public Hearings on the Appropriation Bill [B4-2021].
	
	Standing Committee on Appropriations: Briefing by the Department of Higher Education and Training on the Appropriation Bill [B4-2021].
	
	Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour: Response by Department of Employment and Labour on the written and oral submissions received on the Employment Equity Amendment Bill.
	
	Joint Meeting: Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology and Select Committee on Education and Technology, Sport, Arts and Culture: Briefing by the Department of Higher Education and Training (DHET) on the analysis of the lessons learnt in respect of multimodal teaching and learning mechanisms during the lockdown period in the PSET system.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Public Service and Administration: Briefing by the Northern Cape and Mpumalanga Offices of the Premier on filling of Heads of Department positions and compliance with the Policy of Heads of Department for the Performance Management Development System.
	
	Select Committee on Public Enterprises and Communications: Update by ESKOM on the unbundling process (of ESKOM) as announced by the Minister.
	
	Portfolio Committee on Transport (Subcommittee): Meeting on the Public Protector Report on a systematic investigation into the illegal conversion of goods carrying Toyota Quantum Panel Vans into Passenger carrying Mini-Bus Taxis to transport members of the public for reward: Consideration of draft report; Consideration and adoption of draft minutes of proceedings.
	
	Standing Committee on Public Accounts: Hearing on the annual report and financial statements of the State Information Technology Agency (SITA), for the financial year 2019/20, as well as irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure.
	
	FRIDAY, 28 MAY 2021 
	
	Standing Committee on Appropriations: Public Hearings on the Special Appropriation Bill [B5-2021].
	
	Portfolio Committee on Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation: Briefing by the Department of Human Settlements and City of Ekurhuleni on progress post - meeting on 12 February 2021 in relation to timeframes set for further information; Briefing on actions taken of concerns raised in petitions: Banaero Park; Actonville Park; Breede Valley Municipality; Consideration of minutes.
	
	Joint Standing Committee on the Financial Management of Parliament: Consideration of the Committee’s Strategic Plan and 2021 Operational Plan; Consideration of committee minutes.
	
	For the latest full schedule of committee meetings (updated regularly) please click:
	https://www.parliament.gov.za/committee-meetings
	
	ISSUED BY PARLIAMENT OF THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA 
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo – 082 370 6930 The word “Parliament” comes from the French word “parler” which means “to speak”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng