Parliament, Sunday 16 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Police yesterday conducted oversight visits to the police’s Central Firearm Register (CRF) as well as the Forensic Science Laboratory Services in Tshwane, to gather information regarding the widely reported backlogs at these South African Police Service (SAPS) divisions. The committee was briefed by senior SAPS management led by the National Police Commissioner about huge backlogs in processing firearm licence applications and amnesty at the CRF. The committee was not impressed by the backlogs and proposed a fully-digitized application system instead of the current system which was found to be laborious and inefficient. According to SAPS there is a process of modernisation which is underway and that a bid has already been advertised to computerise the firearm licence application system to make it possible for citizens to renew their licences on line. The committee was also shocked to hear that the CFR continues to occupy the Veritas Building despite it being disqualified by the Safety Health and Environment (SHE) unit. The committee said it was unacceptable for SAPS to allow officials to continue working in an unsafe environment, and committed SAPS to prioritise the matter and engage with the Department of Public Works to have the matter resolved. On the DNA backlog at the SAPS Forensic Science Laboratory, the committee said it will monitor the process very closely as the department implements systems to unblock the backlog which SAPS management said it could take up to the end of next year. The committee noted that the national outcry on the forensic backlog was justified as this could jeopardise the fight against violent crimes as gender-based violence and femicide, if it is not urgently addressed. ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE ACTING CHAIRPERSON OF PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON POLICE, MR KEBBY MAPHATSOE. For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson of the Committee, please contact: Name: Sakhile MokoenaCell: 081 705 2130Email: smokoena@parliament.gov.za The seat of Parliament is in Cape Town, but it could be moved by an Act of Parliament supported by a majority of the members of the National Assembly. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng