The Portfolio Committee on Employment and Labour heard on Friday that if not required by legislation, the Auditor-General’s (AG’s) office would withdraw from auditing the Compensation Fund (CF). The AG’s office briefed the committee virtually today on the audit outcomes of the CF and the UIF (Unemployment Insurance Sund). The entities were audited in three areas, the financial statements, performance information, and compliance with the law. The AG’s Business Executive, Ms Michelle Magerman, said internal controls at both entities are weak and concerning and that resulted in a prolonged situation of unauditable information for a period of 10 years, especially from the CF. She said: “Financial statements are submitted late and contain errors that could not be corrected, this often results in qualified opinions. The CF could not provide credible information, this is concerning and requires intervention.” She added: “The controls that the management put in place to ensure regular, accurate and complete financial reports did not always detect or prevent material misstatements in annual financial statements and the annual performance reports.” Other aspects that concerned the AG were revenue and receivables from non-exchange transactions, payable non-exchange transactions, absence of supporting documents for debtors, consolidation of investment in associates, investments in financial assets, irregular and fruitless and wasteful expenditure, and inadequate records in respect of contingences relating to securities held, ceded and notices of motions and summonses. She also said there was a lack of records in respect of consequence management and disciplinary action against officials on whose behalf irregular, fruitless and wasteful expenditure had been incurred. In respect of the UIF, the qualification areas also included incorrect application of the principles of GRAP and the inaccurate calculation of investment property values. “The PFMA (Public Finance Management Act) requires that financial statements be full and accurate and both these entities failed to meet this obligation. There had to be steps taken to prevent irregular expenditure,” she said. The AG’s delegation leader, Ms Kgabo Komane, lamented that for the longest time the AG has been unable to express an opinion on the CF. “For 10 years it was a total disclaimer, we are unable to associate with the information they put on the table.” She said the UIF was better as there are specific areas that if corrected, the entity’s audit would improve. “We are all going to have to unlock that environment so that we are able to tell the user what is happening. A typical example of an area where we need to unlock is transparency. The biggest concern we are having on the portfolio remains the CF,” she said. The committee lamented that the entities had for a long time been achieving disclaimed adverse audit opinions and characterised it as a horror story. Committee Member, Ms Khosi Mkhonto, wanted to know how this could go on for so long if there were management reports that had been prepared. Mr Michael Cardo said it was impossible for the UIF’s senior management to implement consequence management when it was on suspension for transgressions related to the TERS benefit scheme. He described the CF as an unmitigated disaster and a nightmare that the committee needed to reflect on for the sustainability of the entity. The Chairperson of the committee, Ms Lindelwa Dunjwa, asked the management to explain to the committee on whether or not did the entities employ the right skills. “What is the internal audit of the entities saying? Is this a reflection of a broader systemic challenge?” she asked. She said the committee will make a determination on whether to have a meeting on these matters with the department and the entities before Parliament rises, to afford the management enough time to answer these questions. Ms Dunjwa said: “This is something that we really have to exhaust our energies on. We should be able to confront the situation; we have to go where eagles dare.” By Sibongile Maputi 28 May 2021 The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress