Parliament, Monday, 31 May 2021 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today resolved to request from the National Assembly an extension of 30 days in order for it to complete its work on the wording of the amendments that will see the expropriation of land without compensation embedded in the Constitution.
	
	Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga said the committee had a deadline of midnight today. However, the extension is required because political parties could not reach consensus on some issues, which led to a request for a further 60 days made by the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF). “All political parties represented supported the position for the request of a postponement. Some differed on the timeframe for the extension. However, the committee resolved to request a further 30 days instead to conclude its work.
	
	“I do not think it is necessary to ask for a longer extension as some of the outstanding matters are not many or complex. Some political parties have already moved closer to each other regarding their positions,” said Dr Motshekga.
	
	He said that should the 30-day extension be granted, the new deadline will coincide with the parliamentary constituency recess period. “We will further request a special sitting of the National Assembly once we have concluded our work in order to deal with this matter. Our people have been waiting very long for this and we cannot delay it unnecessarily.”
	
	Some political parties have agreed to return to bi-lateral discussions outside the formal committee meeting in order to bridge the gap or reach consensus on the proposed amendments. The committee had previous called for written submissions, held public hearings across the country and held virtual oral hearings in order to solicit input from the public on this matter.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za Because the members of the Joint Standing Committee on Intelligence (JSCI) deal with classified or top secret information, it is the only committee that has meetings that are usually closed to the public. The members of the JSCI have to get security clearance from the National Intelligence Agency before they can serve on that committee. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape