Parliament, Monday, 17 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Health will tomorrow resume public hearings on the National Health Insurance (NHI) Bill.
	
	The Chairperson of the committee, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, said when the committee finished the public hearings in all the nine provinces, it received requests from over 130 organisations and institutions to make oral submissions and contribute towards the NHI Bill.
	
	Dr Dhlomo said: “The committee will on Tuesday (18 May) embark on a process to listen to those organisations and institutions that indicated that they want to make oral input in the NHI Bill,” said Dr Dhlomo. The process will enable the committee to combine inputs from various stakeholders who have made presentations during provincial public hearings and the submissions from the 130 organisations.”
	
	Details of the meeting are as follows:
	Date: Tuesday, 18 May 2021
	Time: 09:00am
	Platform: Zoom
	
	Parliamentary committees are open to the media and the public. Journalists wishing to cover these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) should send their cellphone numbers to Mlindi Mpindi at mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must send these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow sittings live on Parliament TV (DStv Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Ms Yoliswa Landu
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8203 
	Cell: 081 497 4694
	E-mail: ylandu@parliament.gov.za The copy of an Act of Parliament signed by the President is the official version of that Act and is given to the Constitutional Court for safekeeping. Democratic Alliance