Parliament, Monday 10 May 2021 – The two Houses of Parliament, the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) and the National Assembly (NA), will tomorrow, Tuesday 11 May, hold hybrid plenary sittings.
	
	The NCOP will hold an oral question and answer session with the Economic Cluster 4E Ministers. The cluster comprises Ministries of Small Business Development and Trade, Industry and Competition.
	Please click here for questions: https://www.parliament.gov.za/storage/app/media/Docs/quest_pap/80f2c043-c082-4c47-9db8-fa12f447fc14.pdf
	
	DETAILS OF THE NCOP HYBRID PLENARY SITTING: 
	Date: Tuesday, 11 May 2021
	Time: 10.00
	Venue: NCOP Chamber and virtual platform
	
	Meanwhile, in its hybrid plenary sitting, the NA sitting is scheduled to consider the Civil Aviation Amendment Bill. At the same sitting, the NA will also debate a matter of national public interest themed: “The unfolding DNA crisis at the South African Police Services.”
	
	DETAILS OF THE NA HYBRID PLENARY:
	Date: Tuesday, 11 May 2021
	Time: 14.00
	Venue: NA Chamber and virtual platform
	
	Important to note:
	Members of the media who wish to physically attend the NCOP and NA hybrid plenary sittings should send their details (full name, media house, ID or passport number) to Manelisi Ntsodo on email: mntsodo@parliament.gov.za by no later than 9am TOMORROW, Tuesday, 11 May.
	
	Parliamentary meetings are open to the media and the public. Journalists who are interested in covering these meetings (including receiving links to virtual meetings) are requested to forward their contact details to Mlindi Mpindi on email mmpindi@parliament.gov.za for inclusion in the Parliamentary Communications Services WhatsApp Group, where such information is shared. Journalists must forward these requests using their official email addresses (no private emails).
	
	Members of the public may follow committee and House sittings live on Parliament TV (DSTV Channel 408), via live stream on Parliament’s YouTube channel and Twitter page on the links below. You may subscribe to the Parliament YouTube channel to receive instant notification of live feeds.
	
	Twitter: https://twitter.com/ParliamentofRSA
	Facebook: https://facebook.com/ParliamentofRSA
	YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/ParliamentofRSA
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES
	Enquiries: Moloto Mothapo 082 370 6930 The President is not a member of Parliament. After an MP is elected as President, he or she loses the seat and the vacancy is filled by the next eligible person from the same party. Economic Freedom Fighters on the provincial list for the province of Eastern Cape