Parliament, Tuesday, 4 May 2021 – The Portfolio Committee on Higher Education, Science and Technology has welcomed the appointment of the three new Deputy Directors-General as this will ensure stability at senior management level in the department of Higher Education, Science and Technology.
	
	The committee has noted that the positions of the three directors-general have been vacant for a long time and their filling will indeed see the achievement of the commitments and the vision of the department. The committee also thanked the incumbents who acted in those positions for the sterling work they did.
	
	The department appeared before the committee virtually today to present its revised strategic plan for 2020-2024 and its annual performance plan for the 2021/22 financial year. The committee has noted that due to the constrained fiscus and the impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the country’s economy, the department had to make difficult choices in order to ensure that the commitment made by the government for the Post-School Education and Training (PSET) sector are realised.
	
	Some of the Medium Term Strategic Framework (MTSF) targets had to be adjusted down due to budget shortfall, mainly in the TVET (Technical and Vocational Education and Training) and Community Education and Training (CET) programmes. Head count enrollment for the TVET and CET colleges has been adjusted down and capped at 620 000 and 388 782, respectively.
	
	The committee was concerned that the university enrolments will continue to grow and the current inverted pyramid will not be changed. Reducing the budget of colleges in the midst of high youth unemployment and the three million youth that are not in education, employment and training is very concerning.
	
	The committee has, however, commended the department for introducing skills that are fit for purpose in the TVET and CET colleges. These interventions will go a long way in addressing the local economic skills needs. Interventions to support the establishment of disability units at TVET colleges is very progressive as this will ensure access of students with disabilities to education and training. The committee also commended the interventions made by the department to support the Presidential Economic Reconstruction and Recovery Plan, by ensuring that relevant skills to grow the economy are offered at PSET institutions.
	
	The committee indicated that the budget cuts within the department’s budget over the MTEF (Medium Term Expenditure Framework) period are very depressing. The budget is projected to decrease by R20.8 billion over the MTEF.The department’s budget in the 2021/22 METF period, when inflation adjusted, will decrease.
	
	Of great concern to the committee is the risk that student funding continues to grow at the expense of university subsidies, and if this trend is maintained, student funding will overtake the subsidies to universities. Therefore, in the medium- to long-term, universities’ budgets will be constrained and that will compromise the quality of higher education, as the number of students will exceed the capacity of the universities to offer quality education.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE PORTFOLIO COMMITTEE ON HIGHER EDUCATION, SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, MR PHILLY MAPULANE. 
	
	For media enquiries or interviews with the Chairperson, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Mava Lukani
	Parliamentary Communication Services
	Tel: 021 403 8738
	Cell: 081 503 1840
	E-mail: mlukani@parliament.gov.za The Constitution says a parliamentary committee meeting may not be closed to the public “unless it is reasonable and justifiable to do so in an open and democratic society”. African National Congress on the provincial list for the province of KwaZulu-Natal