Parliament, Friday, 21 May 2021 – The Ad Hoc Committee to Initiate and Introduce Legislation Amending Section 25 of the Constitution today met to continue with its deliberations on the bill that seeks to draft amendments that will see the expropriation of land without compensation.
	
	Committee Chairperson Dr Mathole Motshekga noted that some political parties have already commenced or invited others to have bi-lateral discussions outside of the committee meetings in order to see if there is convergence on the proposed amendments or if they are able to convince others of their position.
	
	Some of the issues include the ownership of land, as it is contained in Section 25(3) of the Constitution, and the question of deprivation, which speaks to Section 25(1). This will include the issue of state custodianship of land versus nationalisation, and whether or not to remove the cut-off date of June 1913 for applications for land restitutions. “I would suggest that a list is formulated of the issues that would be discussed in bi-laterals, so when we meet next week we can see where there is convergence. We have to move to the point of the revised text of the Bill,” said Dr Motshekga.
	
	Dr Motshekga also requested that the legal opinion, which the committee received from Parliament Legal Services, stand over. This is because he needs to address the aspersions made against the integrity of this office with the House Chairperson. “Serious allegations were made against Parliament Legal Services. It is not shared by all of the Members. I would like the opportunity to get advice on how to deal with the allegations of biasness.”
	
	The committee also resolved to approach Parliament’s political management to request additional sessions to meet from next week, rather than the one session per week as in recent weeks.
	
	ISSUED BY THE PARLIAMENTARY COMMUNICATION SERVICES ON BEHALF OF THE CHAIRPERSON OF THE AD HOC COMMITTEE TO INITIATE AND INTRODUCE LEGISLATION AMENDING SECTION 25 OF THE CONSTITUTION, DR MATHOLE MOTSHEKGA.
	
	For media enquiries or interviews, please contact the committee’s Media Officer:
	Name: Rajaa Azzakani (Ms)
	Tel: 021 403 8437
	Cell: 081 703 9542
	E-mail: razzakani@parliament.gov.za It takes 14 months to prepare the annual Budget for its introduction in the National Assembly. Freedom Front Plus on the provincial list for the province of Gauteng